Bill, and we have Heritage New Zealand
with us this afternoon.
Uh, welcome to the committee.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us, so we'll hand over to you
to talk us through your submission, but do take it as read
and then we'll open up the questions. So thank you. Sure.
Cool. Thank you Chair. Uh,
um, so we're here today is Heritage New Zealand tga, uh,
to present on the, uh, planning bill
and the natural environment Bill.
Uh, my name is Dean Mighty. I'm the chief executive.
Um, I'll have also here our, um, DCE policy, um,
Claire Craig, and we've got our team behind us, I hope.
There they are up the back, uh,
to ask you any questions as well.
So, um, so, uh, we welcome this opportunity
to present you to you today about the importance
of cultural heritage and New Zealand,
and the potential for the proposed new planning system
to recognize, promote,
and conserve heritage places
that are important to New Zealanders.
Uh, we are an autonomous crown entity governed by a board
and a Maori Heritage Council.
Um, our purpose is to promote the identification,
protection, preservation, and conservation of the historical
and cultural heritage of OL New Zealand.
We are a treaty based organization.
Our act identifies ways in which, uh,
particular provisions recognize that, uh,
and respects the crown's responsibility to give effect to,
to the treaty.
Uh, we operate throughout New Zealand.
Uh, our staff work with a diverse range of communities
to identify heritage places.
Um, as part of our work, we have 46, uh,
his historic properties.
I know the member there has been to one tuna, uh,
yes, yes, uh, on behalf of the Crown.
And we run a membership program, um, that supports that work
and award-winning publications.
So we are uniquely, uh, well qualified
to assist the Committee on Heritage matters.
Um, so the caring for existing
and well-maintained infrastructure se assets
as a pre preference to destruction is cost effective,
reduces waste and carbon emissions.
And there are many examples and we can follow that up after.
If you have any particular questions around these examples.
Um, uh, the Christchurch Town Hall being one of them,
we've noted here, heritage uplifts personal, uh, wellbeing
by valuing and making transparent our shared stories,
recognizing and reflecting different narratives.
The conservation of Maori cultural heritage reflects the
obligations we have on ori.
Um, and we'll be talking about that a bit further on.
So we've got three, um, three areas we want
to to cover off.
Uh, one is, oh, three points I should say.
Um, and the first part really is around, uh,
really the current system.
So the RMA, um,
historic heritage in New Zealand is primarily protected
under the Resource Management Act
as it's now stance at the moment.
The protection of historic heritage from inappropriate
subdivision and use
and development is a matter
of national importance under that.
So this is section six F.
The relationship of Maori to their culture traditions
with their ancestral lands, water sites, and Wahi, tapua,
and other TGA is a matter
of national importance under Section six E.
Under the RMA, the responsibility for protection
of historic heritage is delegated to council.
So that's an important point to note in relation
to our ACT and the RMA.
So our act, this Heritage New Zealand TGA Act 2014
aims to promote the identification, protection,
preservation, and conservation of New Zealand's historical
and cultural heritage, by
and large, that does not provide protection.
Instead provides the support
and tools needed by the communities and councils to protect
and conserve heritage that is important to them.
Which leads me on
to my first Substative point about the planning bill.
So, 0.1, we know the bill does not specify in any
consequential amendments to our act.
As noted in our submission, the bill does not specify any
of those amendments in relation to the New Zealand
Historic Places Trust Act.
However, the planning bill does make both technical
and significant policy, policy changes to our act.
Our particular concern is the confusion the bill creates
around ongoing purpose of the Heritage New Zealand list.
The list is our national record of Heritage Places that,
in relation to the RMA, is the source of information
for the purposes and policies and the plan preparation.
Now, we have not been consulted on any changes
to the proposed purposes of this core statutory tool,
despite the clear impact this removal from the planning
process has on the purposes under our act.
So we respectfully your request that we be,
be consulted given the change that has been indicated.
Our second point, general comments, including reduction
of the role of Heritage New Zealand
Tonga within the new system.
As you agreed in our submission,
we very much welcome the overall intent,
simplifying the planning system, including reduction
of number of local plans
and the development, particularly around national
instruments, which is real progress.
However, we cannot support the reduction,
significant reduction of historic heritage protection
as it is not in the best interests
of New Zealand communities.
Point number three, importance of cultural heritage.
And I know this would be, uh, something that, um, people,
um, in their own lives and, and,
and context they have with communities understand,
but it is important that we understand it in the national
and wider context as well.
Heritage is a platform for economic growth, development,
tourism, creative industries and associated services.
For example, the Christchurch Art Center, the need
and warehouse precinct, uh, which revitalized, uh,
through collaboration between the Dunedin City Council
and Heritage Building owners.
And of course, we're all familiar with nap, the Art Deco
and WAMU in terms of Victorian,
uh, heritage in those places.
And I like to touch on a smaller community
and place, such as a port in the bay of Plenty.
Mm-hmm. Uh, where the main street has been revitalized
around key, uh, heritage, uh, uh, places that are important
to that community, heritage ups,
personal well, uh, mental health by valu
and making transparent our shared stories
and recognizing, reflecting on different narratives.
The conservation of Maori cultural heritage reflects
obligations on the Treaty of gu.
Please excuse me, I am trying to bridge some of this
so we get across in the time allocated,
but I understand you've already read all of this.
Um, so I'll get to the recommendations,
and this is the important part.
Recommendation one, we recommend
that Maori heritage should be embedded across the planning
system, a treaty centered planning system
with meaningful partnership with Iwi
and PU characterized by shared decision making roles
and adequate resourcing
or produce positive outcomes for heritage conservation.
There are many places where Maori heritage is celebrated
and is essential to those communities,
and you are familiar with places like Rota, Nui,
Koda, and places like that.
I'm saying that because I'm tiny.
Here is of course, uh, people who know that and, and,
and that that is very important to them as it is the nation
and recognizing and providing formal Maori interests in
their heritage lands.
And the planning system will align
with international standards
for the protection of cultural heritage.
Places this potential
is they unlock the aspirations of iwi as well.
We're all very familiar with the post settlement environment
in which we work and we embrace.
Um, and it has particular social economic
and positive contributions that can be made
to New Zealand's net value recommendation to
delete the word significant.
That sounds contrary, doesn't it?
But define it with what is meant
by significant historic heritage.
So that's a key difference with the proposed,
uh, legislation.
The intention to predict only, uh, undefined significant
historic heritage in the new planning system is a profound
fundamental shift in the management
of historic heritage in New Zealand.
The adopt, the adaptation
or the adoption of a higher under, uh,
undefined threshold risks the loss
of a replaceable heritage, places of values.
Heritage is a finite resource once lost or destroyed.
It's intangible values can never be replaced
and it's intangible values are fairly
and impact as drafted.
There is no definition
of significant historic heritage in the planning bill,
which is highly problematic, uh, for a number of reasons.
Uh, we can go into that.
I'd like to just jump to the other recommendations,
just mindful of the time.
Um, recommendation three.
We recommend carrying over the existing RMA requirements
that local authorities have regard
to the New Zealand Heritage List.
This is New Zealand's national record of the country's rich
and diverse place-based heritage.
Um, the list comprises over 5,800 historic places
in, uh, wahi Tap and Wahi, and has collectively
and has collectively scheduled, uh, sorry,
the collective scheduled, uh, places on schedules,
I should say is over 15,000.
Most of them are not on the list.
Uh, the list has been co compiled in consultation
with communities Haua iwi over more than 50 years
by New Zealand's leading historians, architects,
archeologists, and Maori heritage experts.
So it's a well curated risk list with, uh, abo robust system
of, um, of getting things onto it, a robust process.
The last recommendation, um, as we have alluded to, uh,
is also we recommend either deleting
or modifying the rep the proposed regulatory relief
framework as it applies to historic heritage.
It seems this comes from a position of deficit
that heritage, uh, does not contribute, um, to, um,
the overall prosperity of this country.
But there are many examples where that is not the case
where it enhances positively in communities from a social
but also economic standpoint.
We recognize the important role that private owners have
and the cost associated with the protection
and conservation of historic heritage.
However, the regulatory relief frameworks
as proposed will create a costly and complex system.
Councils are not resourced to provide substantive
and retrospective relief,
and that lack is a very strong disincentive for identifying
and protecting historic heritage.
We consider that a national guidance is essential, essential
to assist councils in developing appropriate incentives such
as rates, lease fee waivers, and case by case basis.
We have a couple of examples we're very familiar with.
One is the National Heritage Preservation Incentive Fund.
This is one that we, uh, administer
and that's for private property owners
who have listed houses
with the on the Heritage New Zealand list.
Uh, that has a, a modest
but important pool of over 500,000
that's annually, uh, dispersed.
And that's a useful way in which to supporting
and place, um, incentivizing, um, uh, heritage owners.
The other one, uh, until recently is
the Heritage Equip Fund.
Uh, this also has special, had a special government fund
that helps strengthen seismic strengthening
of privately owned earthquake prone heritage buildings.
So these are just two examples of incentivizing, uh, support
of heritage to enable them to become, uh, important, uh,
cornerstones of communities, not only for the social values,
but also economic, uh, particularly
around tourism and other things.
So overall, we are concerned with the weakening of
historic heritage protection
and a significant reduction of the role
for Heritage New Zealand Tonga.
As a National expert agency supporting councils
and communities, we would welcome the opportunity to work
on this legislation to improve, um, the outcomes
for historic heritage and our minds also improve the
outcomes for New Zealanders
Kilda. Thank you very much
for that submission.
Um, look, we have got questions.
We're gonna go first to Cameron Luxton, who is online.
Oh, thank you Chair. Hey, uh,
thank you Heritage New Zealand
for coming in and submitting on this.
Um, it's a very important part of, uh, why, uh,
heritage is a very important part of, I guess, why, um,
people are calling for a change in some planning rules.
Um, I think first question, if I could just,
I've got a sub straight after this chair.
Um, there's not exactly a clear, uh, Venn diagram
between when councils recognize, uh, heritage, um, asset
and when Heritage New Zealand does.
Do you think there is a clear enough guidance out there
to develop a national policy direction on heritage,
considering the, the, the misaligned overlaps?
Um, yeah, I think it's an, it's an important thing.
And we talk a bit about the infrastructure plans. Yes.
Yeah, I think, I think, um, we, we also see the dilemma
between, um, the two bodies over how best to, um,
affect good heritage conservation and localities.
Uh, we are proposing an idea
of a heritage infrastructure plan.
So if local authorities, um, devise
and think about their heritage strategically,
so looking at those assets that are key
for their communities to understand their place
and their place in their place, um, so
that they retain their intergenerational
and intercultural connections
and see it more in a, in a planned focused way.
Part of our issues are that we've got point by point, um,
with a listing here or a listing there, or a scheduling here
and a scheduling there.
And, um, the current proposals might see particular things
picked out of that as a result of, um, not being able
to afford to retain something through regulatory relief.
And you could find that inadvertently you lose something
that's critical for a community to understand how it comes
to be there and what it means, as well as something
that could be developed into a real asset
through either creative industry or, um, tourism. So, um,
Yeah, Sorry.
Well, that, that does come to my, um,
supplementary question, I suppose is, I mean, if there's,
if Heritage New Zealand is listing a, um, a building
that's perhaps not seen by the community as heritage, uh,
do you think that the councils,
we've had councils talk about the inability
to have off ramps, um, on regulatory relief?
I mean, do you think, like,
if Heritage New Zealand is saying this building that isn't,
um, being seen or the community hasn't, uh, decided it wants
to pay to protect, do you think the regulatory relief
function should be, um, voided from the council if
Heritage New Zealand isn't
stumping up the money to pay for it?
Uh, well, Yeah, no, we don't.
Um, we haven't had a sort of function
or resourcing in that space ourselves.
Um, we've tended to be seen as an information source to, uh,
enable councils to make those choices
and have those conversations with their community.
Um, but there is work to do in the space
of aligning about which ones outta the selection work best.
And that's, that's a space we'd be really excited
to get involved with, to, um, work with councils to define
what, what places add up to the, um, picture that creates,
uh, a strong community connection.
So I think that's a good, uh, so you,
you're talking about informing councils, making sure
that communities are aware of heritage,
but at the end of the day, um, if the cost is being worn
by the community, well, currently the cost being worn
by the private property owner
who has a heritage listing put on their, um, building, say,
um, they'll buy the population being the locality,
the council, if they're not willing to pay for it.
Um, do you think that would be a fair enough off ramp, say
for a council to say, look, we're not going
to list this heritage, this potential heritage building
because of the burden, um, of the cost
that we are now realizing?
I, I think it's this balance between incentivizing, um,
the retention and offsetting some of that cost.
You know, that may be landing on private owners.
Probably another thing to note is there is a vast majority
of heritage owners, private owners who, um, have places, um,
on the Heritage New Zealand list or scheduled that, uh, by
and large, um, are comfortable with that
and also probably have bought into a, a property
or a place, um,
and doing the due diligence in terms of what
that means in terms of its, uh, value and,
and other aspects of, its the properties.
Um, makeup
And define, Oh, sorry,
I was just chair if I had a s just following that answer.
Yeah, we've got a couple of other subs on this, so,
yep. Just one last one camera.
Okay. Last sub. Um, is it possible for you
to provide the committee with any, uh, any survey
or evidence that, um, substantiates the claim
that most people are happy
or is there a number, uh, that you've done research on
that people or private property owners are happy to have a
really heritage listing put on that building?
Um, we can follow up with some information that,
that supports that idea,
but, um, yeah, we'll come back to you on that. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you. We've just got two
supplementaries on this topic.
Uh, David McLeod,
It is supplementary
and I think, um, Cameron touches on a
few points and you've spoken to it.
Mm. But the fact is, is that, um,
I think we've got this tension even within Maori dam
actually because of all of the first rights
or refusals on certain lots certain in pieces
of land, et cetera.
And I could give examples where
heritage orders have been put in subsequent
to treaty settlements, et cetera, et cetera,
and it's not in agreement with, uh, with Iwi as well.
So this is across the board with landowners full stop,
and we, we never get to the point where is the fear
situation of, of acknowledging the importance of ion.
I'm not arguing that. Mm-hmm.
Um, but actually the burden, the liability
that actually is approached by it, I'm really keen
to get clarity from you about where you feel
that liability should fairly sit amongst landowners,
community council, whatever.
I guess there's, uh, layers to that.
And I guess I've indicated around, I guess that process of
due diligence in terms of
what is someone getting into if they look at that.
Um, but all equally, it's about the incentivizing in a way
that, um, is not looking from a deficit perspective.
And the third part really is, um, how we can
create a planning system that's robust in the sense
that those concerns can be heard effectively
and efficiently, and by planning forward through some
of the infrastructure planning
that might come from a heritage infrastructure approach
or the national policies, uh, directions
that will help guide communities making sometimes those
difficult decisions.
Yeah. It's not, it's not ignoring that
or saying there's an absolute position on heritage.
It's always within those discussions and those tensions.
If I can extend that, how much,
how much waiting do you think should be put on the actual,
uh, property owner?
I, I think that
that varies greatly depending on the circumstances.
Okay. Yeah. It's hard to just define
that in some sort of term that
I'm not trying to go, I,
I believe in heritage or that sort of stuff.
Yeah, yeah. But we just never answer this point.
And it's these, that's where the tension comes from it.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. And, uh, I don't, you know, until such time
as we can get a, a level Yeah.
Well, not a level playing field,
but some, some clarity Yeah.
Of what this, uh, I think it's always gonna be a, a, an,
an arduous conversation. It's
Always Yeah. Yeah. I agree.
Look, we are gonna have to leave it there.
We have, uh, met time,
but I think it's a, it's a good place to, to end it on.
Thank you very much, very much today
for all your considerations and feedback.
Uh, appreciate your time and for coming in.
So thank you. Good.
See you. Good to see you again. Phil.
Got a few here at Buildings up Albert of your ones Yes, yes.
And available.
Um, so now we, um, move
to our next submission for today,
uhhu
Afternoon.
Welcome to the select Committee this afternoon. Thank you.
Um, you have 20 minutes with us.
Uh, do take your submission as read,
but we'll hand it over to you to talk us
through it. So thank you,
Lieutenant Koto, uh,
acknowledge you chair, uh, Catherine.
We and the committee members joined today by Maori to
and Headwood Allison online, uh, to KO from within Nhu.
And my name is Ben Bateman.
I'm the chef executive of the Office of Uhhu Exercise
Ranga across twa.
Uh, Oura covers over 90% of the land mass of Tumu,
the south island, and extends, uh,
over the adjacent coastal marine area.
That authority predates the crown
and was expressly acknowledged in our
settlement and the Crown apology.
Our submission today is grounded in
that constitutional position.
Nanga is made up of 18 Puppet,
and we also have, uh, substantial commercial operations.
We are intergenerational in our thinking
and we are solutions focused.
N Tahu have provided two tribal level submissions,
one from Ong Na Tahu,
and the second from Ku Akai,
the Na Tahu Fresh Water Group that to Maori chairs.
Our written submissions provide the detail to support
what we are presenting to today,
but we do not propose to step
through the technical detail here.
To be clear, what Ni Tahu wants
and is capable of delivering is
to partner in resource management decisions for our AWA
to shape a future planning system
that balances sustainable use with strong economic,
cultural, social, and environmental outcomes.
We are systematic by nature,
and we connect top to bottom and across.
To achieve this, the crowd net, the crowd needs to look
to both the Treaty of Waitangi
and also to our settlements to remember the promises
and the agreements made in good faith.
And to con reconfirm those through this legislation.
Our court will begin with outlining the NY Tahu settlement
and the relationship to resource management.
And I'll hand over to, uh, to Edward online
At the chairman members of the panel.
Uh, as a negotiator of the Karima in the Na Tahu settlement,
I can say unequivocally, that
resource management reform cannot be treated
as a neutral legislative re reset.
The settlement and the Resource Management Act together
created a constitutional architecture,
a framework within which Rana
and Crown Governance operate in relationship
to manage the natural environment.
Resource Management was identified as one of the key places
where historic harm had occurred,
and where future decisions affecting our Don
would continue to be made.
And no claims Settlement Act did not require
change to the RMA.
It enabled existing elements that had previously been
err radically followed to be enacted in a clear
and consistent manner by multiple agencies.
Hence, and councils across our, in this submission,
we have described this as a marriage
between the settlement and the RMA.
That was not an accidental.
It reflected the deliberate design
to embed partnership across the resource management system,
and to elevate that relationship
and process above individual council offices
or councils who may not have had a foundational knowledge
of how to work with this set a foundation upon which
partnerships could be realized consistently across our,
so the 98 settlement section 2.2 0.2,
and our deed of settlement confirm, um,
the Crown apology, which expressly acknowledged
Tonga within our
and committed to a new age of cooperation
for the post settlement relationship
between Na Tahu and the Crown.
At the time of settlement, there was or no was no
or very little working relationship between the Crown
and Na Tahu.
So the mechanisms within settlement,
statutory acknowledgements,
and other instruments were never intended to be the ceiling
of that relationship.
They were a template
or a foundation upon which new working partnerships
and relationships would mature over time.
Allegis letter framework that reduces treaty partnership
to advisory functions
or compartmentalize clauses departs from
that architecture
and would look to inadvertently create contemporary treaty
breaches by weakening
what settlement sought to embed.
So, for example, statutory acknowledgements,
providing a stepping stone is an example of how
to work together, coming from nothing to a new age
of cooperation rather than the other way around.
And to assist councils to recognize
and provide for the relationship of Na Tahu
with their lands orders, wahi Tap and other,
therefore reducing in removing barriers
to na Tahu associations in kaki duties
posed approach treats na Tahu
as a bolt-on without agreement,
and in doing so, undermines the intent
and manner of those who came together with a vision
of enduring partnership that would grow
and strengthen over time.
As a negotiator fto, I can guarantee you
that passing the bills then attempting to come
to an agreement on treaty settlement arrangements
after the fact is not
what was envisaged at the time of settlement.
It subtracts from the good faith
and negotiations entered into by all parties,
including those who sat on your side of the table enters
and is destined to repeat past errors of function
and duty is fundamental.
The bills are of great significance to n Tahu
as they impact Tahu over the
AWA and at place.
The response responsibilities we hold
as UA without necessary redrafting, which is
provided in that submission that re marriage are referred
to is broken, is the planning system is rebuilt.
The treaty relationship in the NATO settlement must be
firmly embedded in its foundations.
These reforms may replace the RMA,
but they cannot replace the commitments parliament has
already made to nato.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Look, we've got a few
questions where we'll start. Oh, sorry.
We actually just got to mighty now into
The future visit. Oh, no, carry
on. Absolutely.
Oh, afternoon. Good, everyone.
Look, I guess I've got some points to make
for our water issues here.
Um, and I'll take it as read that, you know, two thirds
of New Zealand surface water
and 70% of its groundwater lies in the south island within
the au So over allocation,
contamination ecosystem modifications have just changed the
situation and were impacted on it.
And we know it's not a sustainable situation at the moment.
Now we are aware of several judicial review decisions
that have occurred, and really what we've taken out of
that is that the core problem in water management is the
failure of governance and senior decision making,
which is surprising
because it's not as if there's a lack of data
in information available.
Now, we do want to say that local democracy
will not solve a governance management problem
because we're just shifting it sideways.
Um, and we only have to look at that
with the Syria crisis in Wellington
and what's going on in Christchurch at the moment.
The tribe will work with the Christchurch City Council
because we know we have tribal members
and citizens there that we need to care for,
but it's a governance failure.
Now, NA Tahu twice
have proposed a smart technology,
AI enabled freshwater management platform
to regional government, sorry, to regional councils.
Both times the councils have failed to engage,
and the problem is not technology.
The individual components exist now to take measurements
and to see the data coming through in real time.
It's a failure of this, those systems to modernize.
So today we have technology to mon to monitor river flows,
groundwater and nutrients, and real time that enables us
and allows us to set clear ecological thresholds
and run a natural capital budgeting system
that protects the ecosystems while supporting
and encouraging economic development.
I'm making this point because we've seen far too many plans
and planning frameworks.
Um, without data, there's far too many reports.
There's a lack of using data.
And again, the, we know that the backbone
of the south island economy is its resources, water
and healthy ecosystems underpin our primary industries.
But treating water as a common pool resource without clear
responsibility as a core part of the problem,
protecting this natural capital
for future generations is not a pious
aspiration by the tribe.
It's an obligation. The tribe understands this.
And we know the same principle is existed
for centuries in English common law through the doctrine
of wastage, which recognizes that it is unlawful
to diminish the capital base, natural capital base
that future generations depend on.
We understand businesses function by increasing profit,
and this is done often
by shifting the externalities onto third parties.
Our view that the New Zealand public
and iwi should not be treated as a third party
to carry the industry costs.
And we make this point because nito assets returned in the
settlement in 1998
and confirmed earlier in the Native land court
should not be used as an externality sink
for the farming industry.
Our view that we need to retain clause 3 1 3,
the the ability to have resource levies in the future,
the largest landmass owned by NATO in the south island is
to, which is like sme.
And what we know is that our agricultural economy should not
be an externality sink for the agricultural economy.
We know that water needs to be treated as part
of a national stock, and all industries that use it need
to do so within set limits.
Now, we think this is possible to monitor in real time.
It simply needs to be uniformly embedded.
Any op is any opposition by industry. In our view.
We are agnostic on rural
or urban, is that if this isn't followed,
it's essentially freeloading of the national asset.
Our settlement requires no Tahu and the crown to cooperate.
That's simply in legislation.
Both parties are obliged to do that,
and we do it within our Tonga
because we are the sole tribe that had this.
Now we have invested in smart technology
and the data systems that integrate into AI so
that we can set clear rights
and certainty for users, enforceable limits,
modern data infrastructure,
all within the economic discipline.
A parliament wants to reform, wants to reform that endures
partnership's, a word used often,
but I'm tending towards co-design these days.
Mu must move towards beyond consultation to co-design.
So our view is we can work
with the crown on designing an AI platform
with smart technology to feed into the economy
and to protect the environment.
I think that's our obligation.
We all have trade offs to do both parties,
but if the data speaks, I think our lives will be easier.
It's my job to pass the bend now. Thank you. Killed
Two final points. I'm conscious
of the time share. I'm sure you do.
The treaty's not an add on.
So we're really keen to understand it's the foundation upon
which the resource management sits,
and we very clearly support the position taken
by the expert advisory committee
to retain a Section eight equivalent, uh, of the RMA
to continue to ensure that Treaty
of YANG has sent central to the
conversation. So I'll park there.
Got it. Kilda.
Thank you very much, uh, for those insights.
Look, we've got a few questions We'll start with Grant.
Yeah, well, yeah. Thank you for your presentations.
Um, this is a very important area and, um, acknowledge that
and we, and the knowledge, the, um, the treaty obligations,
just how, the thing is, how do we get it to work
practically on the ground in the context that you've framed.
Yeah. Um, I know many of family families in Canterbury
who go through a consenting reconci consenting process,
and as part of that process, they sit down with I,
I'm presuming representatives from, um,
either the local hapu iwi and, and, and council and,
and to, to meet, to, to get their reconsent.
Sure. Uh, surely.
And that's on individual, on an individual basis.
And, and then they get a very short term consent.
And you, you, you can't build a business
or a future around short term approaches like that.
And, and they, they, they feel really, um, um,
constrained, uh, uh, and,
and worried about their futures in this space.
Right. And really,
and so how do we get this right so that,
that the policy sits here, yet the, the application isn't
as, isn't quite so specific as, as, as
That? Well, I think
the thing is here, we're solutions focused.
So I think the answer isn't to rush things through. Mm-hmm.
The answer is to take the time to engage with papa at place
and have those conversations.
And the very clear point we would also make is no one else
speaks for Naau, but naau.
So any kind of pan we
organizations that do not speak for us.
So that's very clear. But we wanna step through that.
We don't wanna get into the detail of our submission,
but we have a number of practical, uh, solutions at place,
which are in our submission. And,
And just one quick step, if I may, one of the things,
or basically versus it,
and this is something that rugby, you talk about solutions.
I, I couldn't, you know, and,
and in terms of improving, using data and, and,
and improve water quality stuff, it's a big focus
where the aquifer recharge systems that been put in place,
which were supported
and then suddenly not, doesn't seem to be, I'm just trying
to understand how that sits
Look on, on both your first question in the second one.
Mm-hmm. Our,
our views lay deeply in the data that's coming through.
And what sort of recharge is occurring there.
On the first issue with the consents,
I think the farming community needs security on those.
But if we follow the data AI platforms,
I don't necessarily think those consents should be under
thread or even questioned
because it's the budgeting system
with the minimum thresholds
that we need to be concerned with.
And once those are set, then all sorts
of options in our view, opens up for the problems
once those thresholds go under.
Sure. And, you know, the, the farming community can resolve
that amongst themselves by trading
with different users further away.
For example, if the hydrology, if the water tank is next
to a lagoon or a water way that's, that's going under,
then there's a lot of solutions.
And one of them could be to trade
with within another farming community further down the road
where the impact is not so big.
So we see it more as an impact exchange
system on the environment.
Thank you. Look, we are going to go
to Priyanka now, um, online.
Um, ua thank you for your presentation.
Um, I just had a little, I had a question around the point
that you made, um, that
Tega strongly opposes the omission of the, of a ti clause
and the purpose clause of,
of the bills you have outlined in your written submission,
um, the case of the hawi wanaka, um,
sticky forest, um, example.
And I wondered whether you could, um, maybe just expand on
that a little bit in relation to your anxiety
around the timeframes of the clause, uh,
that you've also mentioned in that submission.
So I'm happy to take this one. So I, I think the treaty,
as I've said earlier, the treaty's not an add-on.
So we, we wanna make sure we have the time
and space to do that properly, but must operate
and practice not simply in principle.
So I guess it's just, there are a number of, um,
examples which we won't get into that are in interest
of time that are in the submission.
But I think it's just making sure
that you don't get overly prescriptive
and, uh, lack of coherence within that prescription
that comes from the current wording and that's in the bill.
So really just stepping back from that
and we clearly supporting that position taken
by the expert advisory committee.
Okay. Thanks. Thank you. And Lan Farm has a question.
Thank you so much for your submission.
I wanted to, uh, pick up on your suggestion and
or, or I guess asking for a bit
of an expansion on your request, that, uh,
human health limits and ecosystem health limits would
actually be set together, uh,
rather than some might say artificially, uh, separated.
Um, might actually ask, can you clarify that question?
We've got a, one of our technical experts here that might,
So the example that you give is,
for example, with nitrate.
So like a really high number for nitrate
for human health versus, uh, ecosystem health.
That's right. Because, um, at the moment you might, uh,
be determining them at different levels.
There's the human health nitrate levels around 11 point,
um, milligrams.
So that's under the World Health Organization.
And then when we look at the environment, it's
around 2.4 in the NPCM.
And so you get these, this, um, disengagement
between those two levels and they don't speak to each other.
So what we are asking for is
that the li we just have one set of limits
and that we actually look at the ecological baseline.
'cause if we get that right, then the human
health limit follows.
Yes. Thank you.
David, did you have a question? Primary?
Did you have a sub Just to quick up on that. Quick up.
Yep. Um, so just further to the limits, um,
you make it really cl clear
that you think any limit should be a hard line limit rather
than, you know, there being able to be a number
of exemptions for different things.
What's your concern there?
There's far too much discretion as, um, the, the, the min,
sorry, the gentleman here.
Grant. Grant, yeah. Mark. Sorry. Sorry Grant. No worries.
Raised. Um, and that's our concern.
There's discretion everywhere for different opinions
and water's one of the most opinionated
areas of come across.
And if the farming community wants certainty,
it's clear data statements to me, which is
what the tribe needs as well.
And I think that's where the trade off has to be
between all communities. Mm-hmm.
Look, we have nearly run out of time.
David, did you have a last question?
Okay. Uh, uh, Edward,
I think I'm getting your vocal chords as, uh, inherited.
Craig's laughing at the back there.
Um, and my question is, is is with the construct, uh, that's
before us with these bills with the funnel,
and of course we've got the national instruments, we've got,
uh, the different plans from spatial plans
and the natural environment and land use plans.
Uh, my question is, is what would be your expectation on,
uh, the crown engaging with Maori in setting those
'cause that's such pivotal in the way the funnel's created.
So it's, the question is,
what's your expectation in, in that engagement?
Our expectation, it's a great question, is very clear
to have our Tonga at the forefront of the conversation.
So we expect to be at the table at every conversation
that matters, right the way through the system.
So at place, our AKA have a deep
aka and knowledge in this area.
I mean, Edward is he, we don't need to speak for
that to Maori as well.
These are the people that need to be at the table over
that next period of time, right the way
through. Anything else to add there?
Look, thank you very much.
I think that's a really good, uh, point to leave it.
Uh, we have gone over time,
but look, we really do appreciate your submission.
Um, some really good considerations in there
and a really, really well written submission.
So thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you. Yeah.
So we now move on to our next submission.
Uh, and that is Meridian,
welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Um, you have 20 minutes with us, so, uh,
we will hand it over to you to talk us
through your submission, but do take it as red.
I mean, it is a, um, a very weighty submission. This one.
There's, uh, plenty in it.
So, um, yeah, we will hand it over to you
for your opening remarks.
Alright.
Um, thank you very much.
And, uh, um, I'm the general manager
of development at Meridian Energy.
Um, my team is responsible for delivering, planning,
delivering, consenting included all
of our new generation projects, um, as well as recon,
consenting all of our existing assets, particular hydro.
So we know the, we know the space pretty well.
Um, I've got two colleagues with me, Hamish, Bert,
and Humphrey Tapper to fill in some
of the important details around our submission.
Um, Meridian's also part
of the electricity sector environment group.
And, um, together we've filed a detailed submission on that,
on this, on these bills.
A copy of it is appended to our submission that'll help
to keep the, the weight up.
Yeah. Um, and I commend it to you
for its coverage in the, in in the detail.
Yep. Uh, look, I'll start by saying
that Meridian strongly supports the direction, um,
of the bills of the Bills national environment
Bill and the planning bills.
Um, and our view,
new Zealand's current resource management system is,
is not fit for purpose.
Um, it's slow, it's expensive, um,
and it delivers real inconsistent outcomes.
So, um, change is needed for sure in our view.
Um, and if we look at what's in front of us, there's a,
there's a lot of work to be done in our sector,
and we believe that change is necessary
to enable that to occur.
Um, and the focus of our commentary is on the, on the,
the electricity system unashamedly.
'cause that's really all we know.
Um, so if we just reflect on our sector,
um, and this is not just a meridian view, it's a,
it's a common view on those who participate in the sector
and those that observe it
or us, um, electricity demand is forecast to rise.
And at the same time, we are experiencing a decline in
indigenous gas supplies.
So the pressure is on us to deliver at a rate
that outstrips the rate that was done.
You know, in terms of new builds at the time, I think big.
So the, the ask is, is extremely high, um, in order
to fill the void that's gonna be left by, um, the,
the declining gas, but also, um, to lower the cost
of generation and electricity
for consumers across the country
and to improve security of supply.
So that is, that's a position that's not really contested
by those who think and know
and operate within the electricity sector.
Once we get through the, the next t charge of investment
that's currently underway
and is planned, we can then look further, I think,
for our economy to really grow
and support new initiatives, you know,
bring new demand to the country.
Um, decarbonizing existing, um, infrastructure
that's currently relying on fossil fuels
like gas in particular.
Um, and, you know, to attract new industry
and newcomers into this country off the back of a reliable
low cost and green electricity system.
To give it some quantification, our forecast is that we need
to roughly collectively build around 1.2 terawatt hours
of new generation every year into,
into the foreseeable future.
And to give that some context, that's around two
large wind farms like the market wind farm
or the Har Wind Farm, which you've, you've been to, um,
every year in order just to keep, keep pace
with the requirement.
It's a lot of work. So we've got five core messages.
Firstly, given its importance to the country, we believe
that renewal energy needs some explicit policy recognition
and the goals for both, both bills
or the mandatory national direction.
So we think that decision makers must clearly understand
that renewable energies of national importance
when decisions and trade-offs are made typically locally.
Secondly, um, existing assets in particular hydro need
to be protected and treated as part
of the existing environment.
This is especially the case for hydro,
it's still the backbone of our electricity system,
and it will be for the, for the foreseeable future.
Hydro is critical for security supply,
and it's flexibility will become more and more important.
It's more wind and solar
and geothermal added to the system,
which is inherently inflexible.
Third, um, we believe a consenting system needs to be fast,
faster, certain,
and kind of proportionate to the,
to the proposals that are in front of it.
So including restoring a direct referral
to the environment court as an option,
enabling joint hearings and avoiding mandatory assessments
of alternative options.
Fourthly, environmental limits are important,
but they need to be realistic and targeted
and proportionate to the proposals.
Um, so limits need to be set,
but they should be set to prevent risk of significant harm.
And our final point
around biodiversity is the concept of no net loss.
Um, we've found that to be unworkable on a project
by project basis, um,
and is able
to unintentionally block renewable energy
projects from coming forward.
So in summary, you know, Meridian supports the bills,
their intent to deliver a faster, clearer,
more certain system to streamline consent processes,
to cut red tape and to focus decision making on efforts
that genuinely matter.
And we, we also believe that with some refinements
that we have identified, we do have the opportunity
to unlock a better energy
and environmental future for in New Zealand.
So thank you. I, I'll now hand off to Hamish
and then Humphrey to elaborate some detail.
Thank you, Koto.
Um, I'm gonna talk you through an example of how the RMA
or any replacement legislation would interact
with an existing asset.
The WA power scheme, in this case,
the largest hydro scheme in New Zealand.
Uh, we are going through the process right now of recons,
consenting that scheme.
Those consents expired in 2025.
So we lodged replacement applications following years
of science and environmental monitoring.
We lodged those in July, 2023.
Uh, we dealt with further information requests
working well with ecan.
We agreed that it would be more efficient
to have the matter directly referred
to the environment court.
Uh, we responded to requests notified,
and the hearing was concluded last,
late last year in November.
And we expect a decision, uh, in April-ish this year.
The, the issue there is that
that application is applying only for what exists now.
It's applying for like, for like water use.
It conforms with the relevant regional plan, uh,
it meeting all the rules and standards which are set there.
Uh, yet that still requires a full hearing.
It requires a exercise in identifying
what is the existing environment.
And that is truly one of the questions, which is now live
and before the environment court is given this thing has
existed, parts of it for nearly a hundred years, the,
the environment court is still being asked to consider
what is the existing environment
when it comes to that scheme.
And that's a, a quite a strange hypothetical, uh,
to have to wrestle with.
Uh, once that decision is released, uh,
there's only one party now who appeared in opposition
to the, uh, hearing, uh, forest
and bird appeared called for witnesses.
And once that decision is released,
we'll have the full rights to appeal that decision
and continue to test that process.
So we really are advocating for something which says that,
that what you see is the starting point for these sorts
of exercises, and that the ability
to participate should not come unfettered.
It should come with reasonable restrictions, uh, so
that there's not open-ended, uh, abilities to continue
to draw out a process that can reach a logical conclusion.
Uh, the next example is gonna be in relation
to some of our development work.
Yes. Yeah. Um, so look, I just have one very narrow point
to, to highlight, which is particularly, uh, relevant
to Ru kaka, which was a solid development up in Northland.
Yeah. Uh, which resulted, um, in delays, um, in relation
to definition of essentially no need loss.
And so if you look at clause 11
and the natural environment Bill, uh, clause 11 D
that talks about to achieve no net loss in indigenous
biodiversity, now the words no net loss, they have a very
specific technical meaning under the RMA
or under environmental, uh, advocacy.
Um, whereby overall the ecological values are maintained
or improved and are fully counterbalanced.
Now, the problem you often have is with
large infrastructure, one way
or another, you are gonna hit some, have some sort
of an effect, and there are different ways to mitigate
and address those effects.
Unfortunately, when you talk about no needs loss, uh,
you have to do a like, for like,
and quite often, like, for like, is not
actually something which is achievable within
that specific area.
So you have to go to, even though you, you, you,
you create a better overall environmental outcome.
You can't actually say that there is a no net loss arising.
And so our concern in relation to clause 11 is
that even though, uh,
clause 12 talks about there being no particular hierarchy,
the way clause 11 refers to no net loss means
that it's tilting that balance
and it will become the apex,
it'll become the most important thing to consider
despite the other objectives.
If you look at those other objectives, they refer to enable,
safeguard, manage, provide, et cetera, whereas
with no net loss, you need to achieve it.
Now that is essentially
creating an absolute standard, a bottom line.
Uh, and so it's creating an implicit hierarchy,
which we do not think was intended.
Uh, certainly there needs to be, uh,
environmental effects captured.
And what we would say,
and our preference, our strong preference would be simply
repeating what was captured under the RMA in section six C,
which talks about protection of indigenous, uh, by the, uh,
indigenous flora and fauna.
Uh, it's also unworkable
and unachievable for large scale infrastructure
to actually deal with no net loss in,
in such a, in such a framework.
Uh, it essentially has a, a no effects
or nil impact, um, standard.
Uh, and as a result, as a developer,
it will most likely result in an avoidance first approach.
And the difficulty you have there when you are a renewable
electricity generator is
that you can only have your projects where the water is
and your existing is Hamish outlined, or where the wind is
or where the solar is, where you're close to, close
to grid connection.
And so that's gonna, if it stays the way it is,
that's gonna create significant amount of uncertainty.
Uh, it also leads to litigation, uh,
and delay in the sense of the ecological accounting tools
that are utilized in assessing
what known net loss actually means.
And so you'll have experts in each camp, uh, trying
to decipher and understand how one actually calculates that.
So you have different tests, different offset multipliers
that's frequently disputed.
It's very, very contentious.
Um, and so as a result, we think,
and to ensure the actual outcomes of the NEA, uh,
we believe that that wording, uh, should be, uh,
more appropriately addressed to match
what has already occurred in the past.
'cause you have the same jurisprudence in that space.
That's, that's what what I'd like to cover,
but we're very happy to take questions.
Brilliant. Thank you very much for that submission.
Um, understand the importance of renewable energy.
Look, we've got a few questions.
So, uh, we are going to start with David first. Thank
You. Thank you very much, Lisa.
Um, I just wanted to talk to your first point
that you raised, um, about the prioritizing
of renewable energy, uh, generation within the goals itself.
My question to you is that, um, why just that
and not the whole energy, uh, provision element?
Um, and what I mean by that is, is, uh, you know,
even though you're a renewable energy generator yourself,
you do have a placement of a, uh, part of the stockpile
of coal because you understand the importance
of making sure we keep the lights on and going.
So my question is, why are you living it
to just renewable when really there's actually a bigger, uh,
energy infrastructure that's important to the country.
Uh, if you look at all the projects that,
that the major generator retailers are proposing, um,
I can't think of one that's fossil fuel back at the moment.
So the, the, the center of gravity
of the activity in our sector,
the electricity sector is all renewable.
Um, yep. There's, there's a deal being done, um,
which didn't require consent, um, around a hunt, uh,
hunting stock, coal stockpile.
Uh, and that's an important part of the kind of insurance
that we need, you know, for dry ears.
But, um, when you look in, in the detail, all the work
that needs to be done is in, is in the renewable space
And a supplementary Yep.
So I totally understand that.
But of course, uh, existing assets
that are not renewable need renewal of consent.
You spoke about some of your ones itself,
so consenting is actually really
important for the whole system.
Yeah, I'm trying to think of, I can't think of an example.
Um, a lot of the, the renewals,
if people looking at hydro, I mean 35 year
cents, they are what they are.
So, you know, you are, you are looking
to cent the exact same thing is, is what's there
for wind can for wind farms. You don't,
I'll make a symbol. So,
so Huntley has a lot of consents
and, uh, there's a lot of
nonrenewable elements to that plant.
I'm not, I can't recall, I'm not sure.
I'm not sure about the structure
of their consents and, and where they are.
Okay, thank you. Look, we're gonna move to Julie Ann Genta
who is online with us today.
Thank you so much for your submission.
I'm not cutting out am I? I've had some No, you're good.
You're good Julia. It's great.
Hey, um, just noting the, um, amount
of your submission you've put into, uh,
concern about the no net biodiversity loss.
I guess my question is, um,
we've heard from a lot of submitters who think that
the natural environment bill should be aiming
to do more than just stop the loss of biodiversity.
But actually we should be trying to increase biodiversity,
um, for long-term human health.
We need the rest of nature to be in a better state.
Um, is your concern with it mainly
that you are thinking on a site
by site basis it would be requiring no net loss
or like, can you see a role for the natural environment bill
to be requiring those who are doing development
to make some contribution to ensuring
that we're enhancing biodiversity
or at least not making it worse?
Yeah, I I, it just sounded
to me like you were thinking about it very much from like,
well, this project might, um, impact biodiversity,
but my understanding of the no net loss, um, would,
doesn't potentially mean that it has to be in that,
you know, one particular area,
but that it could be offset by other work elsewhere.
Yes. I mean that, that, that, I mean, that's certainly,
uh, a, an issue in assessing the effects.
And, and, and that's the,
that's the hurdle you come across in relation to, uh,
defining whether or not your project, um,
meets that threshold.
I mean, certainly from a a marine perspective, it's,
it's project by project, but the, the, the, the,
the decline in New Zealand in relation
to indigenous biodiversity is quite often determined
by other factors such as pest
and predators, weeds,
historic land clearance, and biosecurity.
So it, it covers those elements, uh, in itself.
All we're saying is like allow the full toolbox in relation
to the goals, which includes a variety of matters
and let the decision maker take everything into account.
Because sometimes when you get to no net loss,
even though your project has absolutely, uh,
brilliant environmental outcomes, it's still something
that cannot actually be considered by that decision maker
because it because of the regulatory.
Thank you. And look, we've got
another question from Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks. I just wanna go back to why techie,
which you mentioned, and obviously the implication
with Forest and Bird, that being one
of our most critical hydro lakes.
What is, what is the cost
and time implication of this appeal by them, do you think?
It's a good question.
We haven't, at this stage, we are still waiting
for the environment court's decision.
So the question of an appeal or not is live.
Um, the spend to date in this as an applicant,
Meridian is paying for its own case.
It's paying for Ecan as the consenting authority.
Uh, and there's a, a small
but actually a very, you know, a a a modest cost
for actually the direct referral
to the environmental court for the court's costs.
Our, our spend to date, which is mostly our own costs
and some ECAs is about $14 million.
Wow. And at the end of that,
we might still be heading off to another court process.
That's our fundamental concern.
And, and I understand, I think when your company, um,
submitted on the fast track legislation
that your actual environmental desire with the
reconsent is greater than what you're doing now.
So actually impeded your ability to do more
for the environment because of an
environmental agency. Is that fair
In, in terms of the, the assets we're not proposing
to change anything in terms of the water use.
We are proposing the same water use in terms
of environmental compensation.
We are proposing significantly enhanced program.
Um, we currently fund a program called
Project River Recovery.
We are looking to multiply that by two
to three times in terms of its, its amount and its size.
Um, but we're still having a debate about what's the
starting point and what's,
what should the end point be. Thank
You. And Grant has
a supplementary just up
On That. So I think,
you know, this is,
it's this long term infrastructure.
We had the same conversation with the ports, for example.
I mean, the port's not going anywhere
with all due respect to everybody.
The dams aren't going anywhere and we need them. Right.
I'll be break per say, I gotta stop,
gotta stop, generate power out them.
What's the point in the process?
I, I think it's reasonable that the operation of something
as large as that should be able to be tested periodically.
How often? Well,
at the moment the RMA says that five years. I
Realize that. Yeah.
But in between you have all these planning processes every
10 years, but some something that can look at it
and say, where do we need to make changes
and where, where can things be tweaked or improved?
Makes sense. But something that it says,
let's imagine if it's not there
or what doesn't exist is
that's the hypothetical
realm that we're working on. So it's
More of a tweaking approach than a reconsent approach is
effectively what we're saying here. You think
We, we propose in the submission something like a rollover
with the ability to tune up mitigation, having gone
through this process, we're not saying
let's jump straight into one of those.
We think once we've done this,
we've got something that should endure.
Okay. But we have scheme and all our mm-hmm.
Other competitors also have hydro schemes.
They also need to repower wind farms.
They need to repower solar once we get
to the next generation of those. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. Look, thank you for those insights.
Um, yes, and I can vouch having gone up
to the Tipper Hui Wind Farm, uh, end
of last year switching it on
and it obviously take years taking it,
um, get that switch on.
It's, yeah, there's some, certainly some challenges
obviously in the system.
So, uh, thank you very much for that insight today
and for your submission.
Really appreciate it. Thank you.
Um, so just for members,
before we head on to the next submitter, um,
grant McCullum is going to be taking over the sharing
of the committee for the next wee while
and we will welcome our next submitter, Douglas Allen
to the committee.
Yep. Yeah, Douglas go and
Thank you you minutes for the opportunity to speak to you.
No worries. And I'm very grateful I get 10 minutes
instead of the usual five.
So that's a you major improvement.
Um, look, the submission I've given you is a personal one.
I am a planning lawyer, RMA lawyer, environmental lawyer.
I started doing this in 1990.
So I was here for the tail end
of the Town and Country Planning Act.
I was here for the debates that led up to the passage
of the RMA and I was here for the life of the RMA.
Its first life and its second supplementary life
that we're currently enjoying.
Um, my submission is going to be a little different from
what you've been hearing because I'm gonna tell you
that in my opinion, you do not need to replace the RMA,
you need to amend it.
And that's what I told the last select committee in
2023 when we had the same debate
on David Parker's bills that became acts
that had a half life of about three months or less.
The reason for that is, firstly,
the RMA is fundamentally fine.
It's fundamentally sound.
It has a philosophical basis,
and that is set out in sections five through to eight.
The bills we have today don't have a philosophical basis.
They have a structure, they change a whole lot of stuff.
They keep quite a bit the same.
But the problem we have is that at core,
the decisions that will be made as to what matters
and what's to be prioritized is no longer in the act.
It's in the national direction that the minister will write.
So where is, in the past three years, we've lurched
from David Park's Bill to Chris Bishop and, uh,
and Simon Courts bills.
We in the future will lurch not between bills,
but between ministers
because that's the way this is drafted.
And the problem with that is huge, not just
for the environment and ecology, which it is a problem
for, but for business.
I have acted for 35 years
for major commercial entities, urban,
coastal, uh, rural
and major environmental organizations.
And the concern they all have is that every time
parliament or ministers change policy, the cost
to the environment and the cost economically is massive.
And at the moment, I've got a whole lot of clients
who do not know what's happening in
terms of planning policy.
We have a one
and a half million people living in Auckland
who were told in 2021, you need to have the MDRS
because Parliament told them they had to,
but of credit to the ACT party, they voted against that.
And then in 2023, we had a new set of legislation.
And in 2026 we're gonna get a new set of legislation.
And in the meantime we've had all sorts of changes
at national policy level.
And those things are hugely costly,
environmentally and economically.
And Parliament, I think, needs to start recognizing that.
And it needs to step back from decreeing
what provisions should be telling us
how tall we build buildings around railway stations,
which railway stations we do it, telling us what we can
and can't do with tree control rules
and set the framework for local
and regional decision making, which is what RMA did.
And RMA worked for the first 15 years
because Parliament
as a whole recognized it had been bought into by everybody
and it had a philosophical background.
And it was only after that generation
of parliamentarians moved on as a group that we started
to blame it for all the problems that we have.
Now. You've heard people today talking about, we need,
we have excess cost, we have excess delay.
You can fix that stuff at least significantly.
You can say, I want a decision maker coming into the process
early like we do with a fast track.
You can have a fast track mechanism, could do with a bit
of refinement, but it works.
You can manage the detail in the act
in a way that improves how decisions are made.
The problem we have with these bills is that we are changing
where the decisions are made
and we are taking it out of a statute
and we are putting it into the minister's office.
And that might be fine for national and Act today,
but at some point in the future, it's not gonna be,
'cause unlike STAs Russia,
we will have a change in government.
That's, that's how it works.
And when that happens, we have a new minister
and the new minister will decree what will happen
and that will be a problem for the current government.
And it's my plea to the, to those
who might be in the incoming government that they don't want
that mechanism either because the cost to all
of us is so high.
So in my submission that you, I presume have in front
of you, I have raised eight issues
and I've set out a section on relief sort.
And I appreciate that most people are not telling you
that your bills are ugly.
I'm gonna tell you they're,
and I'm going to say take a breath
because we keep doing this at great cost.
We don't need to do it.
We have a good set of structures already in place.
We just need to improve them.
Now what I do wanna talk about in particular is the,
the structure of decision making that we have instead of it
with the RMA where you have a,
a purpose principles reference to the, to the treaty.
We've got a much simpler structure,
which effectively passes, as I said earlier,
onto the minister, the core decisions in terms
of prioritization of matters.
Now with respect, that's for parliament to set, it's for you
to set as a whole.
Because if you don't, this legislation
I suspect will last longer than Mr.
Parker's legislation did.
But it has no realistic prospect of lasting as long as RMA
and RMA for all the criticism we've had over the past 20
years is actually fundamentally fine.
And there's a lot of it that you've kept.
The problem is the bits that you haven't kept are the bits
that change the decision making structure
and give it to a single person, to a,
to a Wellington based focus.
And that start to remove the ability for local councils
to do things that suit themselves.
You are getting the government's getting a lot
of blow back at the moment in Auckland
on plan Change one 20.
Why? Because you are imposing on this,
on this city in legislation yet to be put through now
provisions that will govern
what will happen in certain parts of the city.
Why are people worried about that?
Because of an old fashioned concept called amenity.
What does this bill do? It removes amenity.
So this is a recipe for dissatisfaction
because you are taking away the core concept
that's been present in planning in New Zealand since 1953,
amenity through the 53 Act, through the 77 act,
through the 91 RMA pleasantness
of environment has been critical,
particularly in urban areas.
We have other issues we need to deal with in terms of the,
the rural areas and our natural environment,
but amenity is fundamental to
what people do and where they live.
And Parliament increasingly has been
imposing outcomes on them.
And parliament in this bill says, we don't care
about your amenity, we are gonna remove it.
It's a deliberate, and ironically it's coming from act,
which is the party at the moment
that's making noise through Mr.
Seymour because people are upset in his electorate
of Epsom about a loss of amenity.
Of course, they're so parliamentarians
generally I think need to focus on
what people want from the planning regime
and focus on why we have one now. Um,
We've uh, we've we've got 30 seconds left, mate.
Yep. So that's all right.
We time for one question, if that's all right.
I pre ahead a question. Certainly. Thank you, prea.
Thank you. Um, I very quick question.
You've alluded to plan change one 20, the fact
that there's a bit of back, there's a fair bit
of backlash in Auckland around
the changes, um, that we've seen.
Just interested in your view around the fact
that Plan Change one 20 was meant
to operate alongside these pieces of legislation,
but they've been designed at different times
and timeframes are quite different.
We did pose this question as, um, a few minutes
to Bishop at the start
and he was keen to see what comes out
of the select committee in terms of, um, submissions.
Okay. What's your view on the two? My,
My view is in my issue eight, which, and,
and in summary, what would you normally do if you are
planning for a city?
You'd first of all make sure that you have your regional
and local government organization, correct.
Then you'd bring in the LA national statute,
then you'd bring in national policy statements,
then you'd bring in district
plans and district plan changes.
What have we done? PC one 20 is required first.
Then in December the government changed 10
national policy statements with immediate impacts
on PC one 20 and other things.
And now we're changing the act,
which will have immediate impacts on PC
one 20 and other things.
In meantime, we are writing round telling us
that we should fold or remove regional councils
or objectively and logically fold our district councils into
our regional councils.
We are doing everything back to front
and that is problematic.
Thank you. I have to leave it there.
We've met time and uh,
thank you very much for your
submission, Douglas. Appreciate
It. Much appreciated. Thank
you all. Thank
You. Cheers. Bye.
Right. We should have next person, uh, Richard.
So it's online. Yeah. Richard.
Um, uh, welcome to the, uh, select committee.
Uh, thank for your submission, grant McCallum here.
I'm, uh, chair at the moment, a few, you've got 10 minutes,
uh, how you users up to you.
You can take the submission as read.
We'd love it if you could leave a few minutes for questions.
'cause members do tend to en enjoy the engagement far away.
Right. Thank you very much, um, the opportunity to speak.
Um, so, uh,
I'm also gonna take things back in time a little bit,
having been around as about as long
as the previous speaker planning wise, um, I worked
as a planner and a manager for Department
of Conservation for 29 years.
Prior to that, I worked for the Town
and Country Planning director of the Ministry of Work.
So I'm familiar with the Old Town and Country Planning Act.
I grew up in Canterbury and been living at here since 1989.
During that time, I've observed the ongoing degradation
of the natural environment, the dewatering of rivers,
the increased nitrogen levels in lakes
and regular algal blooms Rivers unfit.
The let alone from this has happened under the RMA
where used development and protection of the natural
and physical resources is meant
to be safeguarding the life supporting
capacity of our environments.
The new legislation
as drafted will take this
environmental construction to a new level.
When I worked for the Biological Resources Center in 1986
years ago, I was making submissions on district plans
recommending the inclusion of significant natural areas
to protect indigenous biodiversity.
Since then, there has been a campaign from the farming
sector against SNAs.
This stems from a fundamental disagreement over
who has responsibility
for our inherited indigenous biodiversity, Tonga,
and a perception among some
that private property rights include the right
to destroy our natural heritage
and common property resources.
Common property resources include air, water, sunlight,
rose, infrastructure, minerals, energy, wind, water, gas,
and geothermal silence, scenery,
landscapes, parks, wilderness areas, tga, heritage,
orange Ruffy, Wales, feral deer, salmon Wallabies Go,
and Cary just to name a few.
They all have rights.
Some are claimed by the crown or iwi
or are recognized as natural entities.
For example, the F River, the far right agenda
to commodify everything
and assert the value of only private property rights
is an ideological construction be kept from reality.
Regulat regulatory Relief is now seen as a solution
to override our public interest,
but it'll generate more litigation, be unworkable,
and where it has effect will reduce the
quality of our environment.
The Natural Built Environment Act 2023,
stipulated development
with biodiversity resources in power protected.
These principles have been abandoned in favor
of unlocking development capacity,
delivering infrastructure,
and enabling primary sector growth.
This represents a return to pre 1990 planning legislation,
concepts, balancing environment and development,
or even worse, making development
preeminent over the environment.
Overall, this legislation represents a decline in a
recognition of shared values, an attack on shared property,
and the protecting the environment for common good.
It will lead to an uglier society, more litigation,
more pollution, additional biodiversity loss,
and will do nothing to reduce climate emissions.
Now I just want to address, um, a few specific changes.
First one is that the needs adequate recognition
as a minimum, uh, should be as in the national, uh, natural
and Built Environment Act, which is
that the treaty should be given effect
to the principles be given effect to second point,
the protection of areas of significant indigenous vegetation
and significant habitats.
For indigenous fauna, which are currently matters
of national importance in the RMA should be contained within
the builds gold recognition
of landscapes, green spaces, amenity, heritage, trees,
and biodiversity sites should also be included in the bill
goals and contents and consent considerations.
The concept of regulatory relief has been imported from the
US planning system
and was rejected in the drafting the Resource Management Act
and the subsequent amendments.
It is based upon a recognition
of private property interests only
and provides no recognition of common property rights,
shared resources, externalities, the rights of species
and other natural entities.
And our common heritage in TGA who speaks
for these common resources
and rights councils are unable to regulate for them.
Section 85 of the Resource Management Act stood the test
of time and should remain.
We are experiencing a climate emergency.
The current government has not noticed
of the recent devastating floods across the country.
The bills must be amended to face greenhouse gas,
emission reduction and climate change.
Resilient at the center of Planning and Decision making.
Minister of Conservation should retain the authority
to approve policies, limits standards
and plans in the coastal marine area.
And to grant wildlife permits,
the minister Department have the expertise
to represent crown property rights
or interest in these matters.
Lastly, these bills are on public participation.
NGOs, iwi and Har will be able
to submit on resource consents when their interests are
affected, regardless of their location,
and not only when council planners deem these
to be significant effects.
In summary, I consider this legislation has taken out a row
back for penny period, but must seen in the 1970s is totally
unfit challenges of our current era
and should be severely amended
or repealed when there's a change of government.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak.
Thank you. First question.
Yeah, thank you Mr. Chair. And thank you very much.
Uh, Mr. So, uh, I wonder if
any future government, if not this one,
seriously takes the need for us to center the health
of ecological, um, systems as a necessity
of human thriving.
Whether they could retain this
legislation in its current form?
Well, as I said, there would be have to be very,
very significant restructuring of the, the gold structure
of this piece of legislation.
Um, if you're to actually provide for the, uh, protection
of the ecological underpinning
of our society is the basis of our economy.
So maybe it'd be all completely repealed.
Maybe it could be worked backwards towards something which
was, um, that the natural
and built environment legislation of 2023.
I do stop on that. You go.
And what was your view of how close, uh, we came to the mark
with the Natural and Built Environment Act?
I thought it came very, very close.
Um, obviously not perfect because of a conservation bent.
It could have gone further, but, um, it was coming in terms
of where it was coming from in terms of a policy position.
It was represented, um, putting the environment first
before development
and, um, that's should be fundamental to what,
how we should be managing our biodiversity climate
and the situation we're currently in.
Cutting. Yeah,
I I've got a couple questions if you don't mind.
Um, so just you, I mean, it's speaking, I'm,
I'm a landowner farmer
and I've got know plenty of people in the space
and if we've got a business
and if you suddenly said, we want you
to do change your farming practice to look
after the biodiversity on this property,
and it's gonna reduce the ability for you
to earn your income and the lower the value of your property
by, I don't know, 20%, do you think
that's a reasonable thing to put
expectation to put on individual?
Uh, that that is an expectation that has been around since
the Resource Management Act was brought in
and prior to that, even under the Town
and Country Planning Act, because I do some experience
of being involved in that.
So this is putting it completely on its head.
The approach and the reason question, this is a matter
of framing, are those common, common heritage tanga of,
of insignificance as compared to the significance of both
that personal piece of property that you own as a farm.
That, that that's easy for other people
to say when it's other individuals
who have invested their own capital into a, into a business.
And this is the, this is the balance you need to strike.
So for example, we had a situation in the far north
where we had, uh, the government, the,
the re the council today wanted to put a whole lot of, um,
SNAs over the, a a widespread area.
And there was blow back from landowners,
including iwi pushed back very, very hard on that.
And they backed right off
because the impact on them as, as landowners
and their businesses was so substantial.
Surely there is more opportunity to work with the community
as in truth, for example, uh, the farming community.
A lot of 'em get involved in Q2 trust.
I know iwi do a lot of work in this space as well,
rather than just very,
'cause it's very easy for someone without financial skill in
the game to impose a cost.
And that's surely what the regulatory relief is targeted
to do, to make sure that that cost is actually spread
to those that want to benefit as well.
You'll find the regulatory re relief mechanism of its, um,
put through under this legislation will stifle almost all
regulations that impose controls on, on, on land use, um,
for environmental purposes,
but councils won't be able to afford it.
Um, I'll just say that in relation to
how the SCNA program in the past has been implemented has
been to be critical.
And I took part in the negotiations for the banks Expon
district plan back in the late 1990s, um,
representing the Department of Conservation and that,
and we've reached, uh, an agreement over
what rules would apply to landowners
and which ones wouldn't,
and they may not have been specifically ecs.
And we actually set up something called the bank's
Financial Conservation Trust.
And actually the balance between
what farmers can burn private property owners can do on the
peninsula here is very sound.
And that was achieved under the current resource
management and its settings.
Yeah. Anyway, we met time.
Thanks very much for your submission, Richard.
Appreciate it. And, uh, we'll, um,
thank you very much. Move on. Thank you.
Right, thank you very much too.
Kayla, we're Wildlife fund is our next
And would you like us here here,
Dear, please? I think it's a normal
So we can, Everyone can see you.
Great. Welcome, welcome, welcome.
Uh, great to have you here.
Uh, we have 20 minutes with you how you use this over
to you, but we've got your submission.
You can take it as read, make a few introduc comments.
It's always great to leave a bit of time for questions so
that we can do that.
Please don't far away.
Of course. Um, nu
for those of you I've not yet had the pleasure of meeting,
my name is Kayla Den Beb
and I'm the Chief executive of WWF New Zealand.
And I'm here today with Lillian Fuer WWF's,
principal policy advisor for Conservation Impact.
To reiterate, we really appreciate the opportunity
to come speak to you today, um, about the planning bill
and the natural environment Bill.
Our health, our economy,
and our identity in New Zealand are
inseparable from the living world.
When natures thrives, people thrive.
As you will know, reform
of the resource management system presents a huge
opportunity to address the environmental degradation
and loss of biodiversity that we have seen in the past.
But as drafted, our view is that the planning bill
and the natural environment bill don't yet put nature
where it ought to be, which is at the center
of the system quite literally.
In New Zealand, nature underpins everything we value human
health, our climate resilience, and our prosperity.
Our primary industries, which make up 7% of our economy,
rely on healthy soils, fresh water, and intact ecosystems.
Tourism depends on the places that people come here to see
the air that we breathe, the clean water that we drink.
At the same time in New Zealand,
we are facing ongoing environmental decline,
significant loss of wetlands, degraded waterways,
and the majority of our native species now threatened
or at risk of extinction, those species threatened
or at risk of extinction includes 90%, 90 of all
of our seabird species, 84% of reptiles, 76%
of freshwater fish, and 74% of our terrestrial birds.
Those figures should astound all of us,
and particularly the members of this committee.
And as you hopefully know, a lot
of our remaining indigenous biodiversity is actually on
privately owned land, especially in lowland
and coastal ecosystems where pressures from land use,
intensification and neutral
nutrient pollution have been the greatest.
As I said, reforming the RMA is a once in generation
opportunity to turn around the environmental decline
that we've seen in New Zealand
and ensure that our environment thrives
for future generations.
But only if we align this law with the outcomes
that New Zealanders rightfully expect as drafted.
We consider the bills prioritize private property
and short-term economic growth,
while failing our fundamental responsibility to support
and protect the environment.
Today, Lillian and I are going to speak
to the five main concerns that WWF has as well,
and to outline practical fix fixes
that we think are needed in the bills to deliver a system
that protects nature and supports New Zealand's economy,
our livelihoods and way of life.
So our first point is
that the bills really must strengthen
environmental goals and limits.
The purpose for setting limits is
to ensure the life supporting capacity of air, water,
soil ecosystems are maintained.
This supports our economy, primary industry, health
and wellbeing of society, and the safety of our communities.
The goals need to be a lot stronger to make sure
that the limits that are established can work in practice,
and actually do provide
that life supporting capacity instead
of continued loss of nature.
As we've seen under the RMA, we recommend
that there be a hierarchy of goals
with safeguarding nature as a top priority.
And that the goal for no net loss of biodiversity is changed
to net gain for biodiversity
limits can then be set to achieve these goals.
And the bills introduced the environmental limit framework,
which is really great in principle,
but they can be breached or overridden.
And we see this as a loophole in the bills is currently
drafted, meaning that councils would default
to non-regulatory action where it's not feasible
to regulate the beyond national standards,
even if the local environmental
circumstances really need it.
There's also no limit or mandatory baseline for biodiversity
or threatened species with this being open
to regional interpretation and variation.
So we recommend
that the natural environmental limits are binding
and that the rules of the primary implementation tool,
this would reduce litigation, give businesses certainty
and focus on the delivery of food limits and goals.
Point number two, the rights to submit
and appeal on, on decisions are essential.
We are deeply concerned about various parts of both bills
that narrow public notification, submission, and appeals.
Collectively, these provisions exclude expertise such
as EV organizations, NGOs, scientists,
and researchers exactly at the point in time when decision
makers most need that input to assess
how their decisions are gonna impact on nature as well
as their obligations under the acts.
As decision makers, we recommend restoring public
and expert participation, um, consents and plans
and broadening appeal rights so
that region specific decisions can benefit from national
expertise and scrutiny.
Good participation lifts the quality
of decisions matches problems early
and saves time and costs later.
Our third point Wildlife Act, author
authorizations should stay with doc,
the natural environment Bill would let councils issue
Wildlife Act authorizations that are
currently handled by doc.
Most councils, even if they do outstanding work on
biodiversity, don't have the specialist species expertise
or the national perspective
to assess effects on wildlife such as Kiwis bats or lizards.
Bringing in this capability case
by case would be really costly for councils,
and even if they did bring it in, it would still fail
to provide that national level oversight of those species.
There's also no clear goal in the new framework
that matches the Wildlife Act for purpose, which is
to protect specific species from harm.
So while we, we acknowledge
that there is sometimes overlap in the information needed,
uh, from resource consent applicants
or developers for their consents in their Wildlife Act
permits, giving permitting
to councils is really not the right solution.
The Wildlife Act is enacted in 1953
and does need reform alongside other outdated conservation
legislation to better meet the unique needs of our wildlife.
But until this happens,
this clause should be removed from the bills so
that doc retains its authorization role.
Many councils do outstanding work for biodiversity,
but TGA species need national level oversight
and specialist science,
and that's doc's core role
until the Reform Guide Life Act is in place.
Our fourth point is that spatial planning is useful,
but that it must be done well.
We strongly support the concept of spatial planning
in the RMA framework.
It gives certainty for resource users
and it has the potential to set us up for it
to have a long-term vision for nature.
But a few parts of this bill need fixing
to make sure the environment is well managed.
The wording in clause 67 about a ra.
What about what a regional spatial plan must do is heavily
focused on development and infrastructure.
And while it does mention development within environmental
limits, we've already outlined our concerns about
how strong those limits will actually be
as currently drafted.
We don't believe that regional spatial plans will properly
set a vision for the environment
or for how development affects it.
Additionally, as we understand the bill spatial plans would
be prepared before regional environmental limits are set
that risks locking in development in places
where it simply may not be appropriate
once those environmental limits are known.
So we recommend
that regional spatial plans first be required
to identify important areas for biodiversity,
and second, are developed at the same time as limits.
So those instruments can align
and be both be evidence-based.
We can consider that these interventions would better
safeguard the environment and the habitat
of our most vulnerable species,
and that in the long run, this will better support people
through the ecosystem services we rely on in New Zealand.
Our fifth and last point is
around the regulatory relief framework.
We strongly believe
that the regulatory relief framework should be removed
as there are already a variety of ways
to support landowners as drafted.
The widespread and unclear compensation requirements would
discourage councils from setting rules
to protect biodiversity because the potential
or unknown compensation costs would be too high for them
to carry vague thresholds.
Also invite litigation which could cost landowners the crown
and councils alike.
We absolutely agree
that landowners sometimes need support if faced
with protecting biodiversity or landscapes on their land,
but these circumstances are limited
and they are best addressed through non-regulatory tools,
not compulsory compensation rates.
Relief can help in some circumstances such as
where significant natural areas are identified.
There are great examples all over the motu
of wider non-regulatory support to landowners such
as extent collaborations between councils, landowners, iwi,
community groups, and philanthropists to ensure
that landscape scale protection of nature like wild TNA
or cape to city in the Hawks Bay councils
and landowners do not need a mandatory compensation regime
to work together or
to take pride in protecting our shared biodiversity.
It is appropriate to have a process similar
to section 85 of the RMA.
If a proposed plan provision would render
that interest in land incapable of reasonable use,
we recommend removing the regulatory relief framework
and instead keeping an RMA style test for genuine hardship
alongside expanding targeted non-regulatory
support for landowners.
In our view, this would keep incentives strong
to protect indigenous biodiversity while
still treating landowners fairly.
In summary, we urge substantive change so
that the bills genuinely protect nature while also meeting
the needs of New Zealanders.
AL'S prosperity and identity rely on a healthy environment,
yet decline continues.
Reform of the RA is well overdue
and it is a real chance to course correct
to protect the species
and places that we love,
whilst also supporting the development of a strong economy
and long-term intergenerational wellbeing.
We consider the five, uh, changes, improvements
that we've put to you today are pragmatic
pro certainty changes that align environmental recovery
with also having a resilient economy.
Thank you very much for your time today,
and we welcome any questions.
Great. Right, well, we've got a flurry of questions.
We'll start. Pian, you had hand up first.
Thank you. Um, thank you both for your submission
and your very clear recommendations as well.
Um, just a couple of related questions.
Um, the, the goal around no net loss that you've, uh,
referenced as well, and I take your point,
you prefer net gain to be in, in the legislation.
Either way, do you think the bill needs
to define the baseline
that will be used in order to measure either?
Yes, I think it does. And this is one of the issues I see
with, with no net loss
and with offsetting, which is the primary regulatory tool
to achieve no net loss.
It needs a really strong foundation of biodiversity data
and monitoring that New Zealand currently doesn't have, um,
and in as much detail as needed.
Mm-hmm. So I think that strong baseline is really needed,
um, in order to make sure
that we're actually achieving no net loss
or even better neck gain.
Thank you. And, and Mr. Chair, just one last one.
Just on the point around the hierarchy of goals.
You mentioned that you'd wanted such
that safeguarding nature was at the top.
Could you tell us what
that hierarchy would look like in practice?
Sure. So in a general sense, not in the specific wedding
of the goals, um, in the bill,
but in a general sense, we think
that nature should be the primary goal protecting nature,
and then alongside supporting the life supporting capacity
of air, water, soil ecosystems,
then there should be goals relating to people's health
and safety and then more around the wellbeing
and economic efficiency.
Okay, cool. Okay, thank you. Uh, Duncan.
Oh, Kiara. And, uh, thank you for your submission.
Um, I guess really enjoyed your submission
and your written submission.
One of the things you do is, um, advocate
for more public participation in the process than it's
currently anticipated
and also, you know, more robust appeals framework.
The concern about that is that it's going to
appear at least, um,
to increase the time taken in getting s**t done.
I guess I wouldn't give you an opportunity to talk about
how, you know, good outcomes can be consistent
with the kind of procedures that you are advocating for.
Sure. So I think, I mean,
setting up the planning system really well
with really clear goals, really strong limits,
and also really well done spatial planning should reduce a
lot of the time in the system, um, from that point onwards.
So I think we're talking here about like front loading a
system with really robust planning at the start.
And similarly participation and through consents
and submissions really prevents late stage disputes
and prevents issues that arise
after decisions have been made.
So it's really faster to get it, to get it right once, um,
rather than fight over it for a long period of time.
And providing that clear framework up front
and then providing the right, uh, level of input
for people's expertise to be part of that decision,
um, really helps that process.
And I guess, um,
just can you give me an additional comment there,
because we heard from NA Nhu, um, earlier on today
and just the inclusion of UA in that process as well.
D does the same thing apply?
Do you want me to take this one? Yeah, I mean,
relevant expertise resides all over,
and that includes particularly with mana.
And I guess our strong view is that for this system
to work effectively, you need to have it set up
to have the right information flowing into decision making
at the most appropriate stage.
Um, and our view is that
in situations like this, it's better to go slow.
You need to go slow and then go fast.
And with respect to, um, the particular capability
and expertise that Mana possess, I think it's essential that
that's built into the system at an early stage.
Thanks for that, Ryan. Thanks Chair.
Uh, thank you Kayla and Lillian for your submission.
Um, Lillian, you talked about broadening wasn't,
you didn't use the word appeal rights,
but essentially stakeholders to have commentary on Well,
you know, to solicit feedback, I'm still trying
to reconcile the submission here from white techy hydro
where, you know, we heard a figure of $14 million forest
and birds submitted for the environment court.
They wanted to triple their environmental impact with the,
the recons consenting of an existing, uh, hydro dam.
That's renewable energy.
So I mean, where do we draw the line?
Sorry, can you explain that again in terms of, you asked
around appeal rights?
Well, I mean, you, you are keen to broaden, um,
I guess wider stakeholder engagement Yeah.
And consenting processes. Yeah.
But here we've got one that's actually holding up and,
and nationally a government owned renewable energy project
that wanted to do more for the environment.
Mm. And the irony is, is it's been stored
by an environmental NGO.
Right? So, um, I'm not across the details of
that specific case, but, um, thank you for that example.
So I think, um, in a case, hypothetically speaking,
if you've got a really significant proposal
that's large scale, I think it's really important
that you do set that up right?
By allowing for that expertise to come in at
that early stage before decisions are made.
And that will help, um, flesh out, you know,
the exact detail around what kind
of ecosystems we're talking about here, what kind
of species do you need to be protecting, as well as
what kind of processes should be in place to, to, um, ensure
that the conditions are right and
and to enforce those over the long term,
even if they are looking for an
environmental gain in the long term.
Yeah. And this was a, this was one
that was already in place and it's been in place
for a long time, so it wasn't like it was new.
The risks were fairly quantified. Mm-hmm.
I guess I just say there are examples like
that all over New Zealand's history with the RMA system.
And we are not sitting here in front of you today suggesting
that it doesn't need to be addressed
because quite frankly, the R-A-R-M-A has not delivered
for people or for nature in Zealand, full stop.
Right? So we support reform of the RMA.
Um, but with respect
to your particular question about appeal, rights
and involvement, our very strong view is that
to avoid lengthy
and litigious processes, you need to go slow to go fast.
And that means you need to be reasonably inclusive
and considered when pro projects are in the,
when you're in the planning stages
and when projects are under development. But
When, when you say go slow to go fast,
what about an eight year wind farm
that takes two years to build?
I mean, how slow do we go? It's,
it's clearly country's productivity.
I think there's a balance to be struck there, right?
I'm, I, it would be far school for me to say, oh,
it's gonna, it's gonna take you two years to do a wind form
or like six months to do an X.
Every project is different and real.
We believe that high quality spatial planning, which is a,
which is a, the framework that's set out in this bill,
if you do it well, can expedite things
and should expedite things.
It just means that you need
to invest the resources
appropriately upfront in that process.
Excellent. Okay, Cameron. Oh, thank you.
Um, my question actually does flow on a little bit from, um,
Ryan Hamilton's question there.
Um, Lilian and Kayla, you, you, I mean, it's it's good.
Uh, if you, um, in your submission
to be talking about when someone's in genuine
hardship from a controller, an overlay been putting on their
property, that there's something should be done.
I mean, recognizing that seems important,
but I think the wider comments that we're getting to, um,
particularly after Ryan Hamilton's question is there is a
lot of money that's currently being spent, uh,
litigating trying to consent, you know,
1.3 billion on resource consents every year.
Uh, specific examples that run into the millions.
Do you think that actually servicing the costs through, uh,
regulatory relief mechanisms saying this is actually
what the cost is being born by the, by the property owner,
uh, therefore, you know, is it worth,
it might be a better way of showing the cost so
that more money can be, uh, saved at the back end through,
um, the programs we're just talking about.
And that would allow more money to be used
for things like environmental, um,
restoration and conservation?
I think that's a very interesting question.
Um, and I guess what I would say is that the system
as it stands, but also the framing
of this bill does not actually
capture the costs being born across the system full
stop. As in that's what
Regulatory relief is trying to do though. Right?
If I can just elaborate on that slightly.
Historically, the RMA has really failed at addressing the
cost of negative externalities which are being born
by the public of New Zealand.
Hmm. So if an outcome of intensive dairying, for example,
or any other type of development is a dramatic decline in
freshwater quality, it's not in individuals
who are bearing that cost.
It's the people of New Zealand,
the taxpayer future generations, all our children
who can no longer swim in rivers
and lakes until you can get the system
to start addressing the impact of negative externalities.
And I don't think you should be focusing on one
particular area of costs over another.
That was a bit of a tangent,
but the point here is that our grave concern,
which I think has probably been expressed
by numerous other submitters, is that the effect
of a regulatory relief
framing in this bill will actually have a really dramatic
chilling effect on, on the ability
of those taking decisions at planning stages
to appropriately protect native biodiversity at a time when
our biodiversity is literally on the brink.
And I think I would just implore this committee
to really give that some consideration
because, you know, the decisions
that are taken in the context of this legislative reform are
very significant for the country.
And there are coming at a time when we literally cannot
sustain much more loss in some of our species
and ecosystems without seeing extinction, quite frankly.
Quick. Steve, thank you.
Question. Thank you, Mr. Um,
so you articulated very clearly the phenomenal, uh, losses
that we've had ecologically in the last 30 years,
and it proves the failure of, um,
favoring profits over the collective commons.
I wonder, is it galling for you to be here trying
to make the case that the primary
and primary environmental law should
prioritize the environment first?
If you can keep your answer
short, I think I know what it'll be.
There you go. Yes, it's,
thank you very much for your submission.
Really appreciate it. Appreciate your time. Thanks. Thank
You very much
After all that. No,
no, thank you. It's all right.
Look, it's effectively a yes
or no question, so yeah, please.
Very well. Um, welcome, welcome, welcome.
We have, uh, plenty minutes with you
for your submission on Bill, these bills, uh,
the time, how use is over to you.
Um, uh, we pre we've got the
submission can take it as raise.
Uh, it'd be great if you a bit of time for questions
after your initial presentation.
By way, go.
Uh, RA, my name is Tanya Ti normally known
as boys auntie with all the jobs,
but today my clear hat is chair of my,
which is, uh, pu under the 18 of
and to the side I have Nicola, um, Rikers
and, uh, who's, who's more the expert, to be honest. That's
Right. Don't worry.
Yeah, so look, I just, I I do want this
to be more interactive.
I really, I'm gonna keep it short here, read my submission.
I'm more interested in, uh, the questions so we can get
through and have a, about this.
Um, really it's,
I'm here seeking opportunities.
I, uh, mehi, iwi and Hapu who have come on the defense,
and that is always needed.
I'm here to, uh, to give opportunity, uh, to
what is possible in the RA.
So, um, well it's more
of an opportunity in the planning framework
to enable more efficient economic use to, uh,
to Maori resource.
'cause you know, quite presently,
and I'll be really clear, in the national planning standards
for zoning, they call it Maori purpose zone.
Um, so I'm going to use your terminology that it's been used
through the planning bill at home.
We call it,
is based on economic development.
So it's not just about housing, it's not just about, um,
just building our houses
and our little, it is economic development.
Currently we have kga, uh, in
district Christchurch city council,
and we have a strategy over the, uh, city.
Um, so we, our current strategy, so to give you a clarity,
why have we submitted today MR 8 73,
which is Maori Reserve 8 8 7 3 was created
through Kemp's purchase deed, settlement and perpetuity
and housing schools, hospitals,
and expectations of self-sustainable, uh,
economic activity was promised through Kemp deed.
Do the land use recovery in 2013 following the Christchurch
earthquakes was the format acknowledged
after 165 years in the planning environment.
Unfortunately, the new policies
and rules were limited and ineffectual.
The includes Christchurch,
yet we have no reserve land in the city.
Definition and planning rules on the use
of Maori land prevent us from providing
for hapu within the city,
also stops us from building our own communities.
We have spent 10 plus years advocating
and working with councils to build an understanding
of the opportunities for in future plans.
We're gravely concerned that, um, we have, uh,
we might lose it all through this planning bill.
So you can imagine since 2013, all of the gains we've done
through this we're about to,
we're potentially going to lose it.
Some of the issues that we've seen in the, um, bill,
the new planning framework does not provide for the reality
of how iwi and hapu hold or use land.
Um, it's narrow understanding of Maori development,
narrow definition of Maori land,
which also excludes crown granted land
and reacquired ancestral land
bundling the Maori land definition
and the national environment standard for papaya as a basis
for a Maori purpose zone would restrict an application
and maintain planning barriers.
But I'll let Nicola talk a little bit more to that.
Sure. So, um, I guess
what we are concerned about is in terms
of looking at the new framework
and understanding that there's the bill,
but there are national planning standards still to come and,
and regional spatial plans, et cetera.
We are concerned to make sure that what is in the bill,
which is the very foundation, I guess, of what are all the,
the future actions to come in the framework,
that it doesn't preclude economic development of Maori land.
Um, and so as Tania has explained
within Christchurch City, for example,
when Christchurch city Council comes to
and says, we want to engage
with you on some things from Maori land, we, we simply have
to say there's no point
because we don't meet your definition.
So, um,
sometimes they're probably unintended consequences,
but we're really concerned to make sure that the Maori goal
that's within the planning bill definitions,
um, do not preclude the opportunity for Maori
to use land that they may acquire in the future, um,
or existing reserve land where it is possible.
And understanding that, of course Nia can talk to this, that
e gwi and Hapu may have different terminology
and land holdings across the country.
Um, we're also really concerned about the regional spatial
plan, that it is more than just engagement
or a consultation step that the councils actually, um,
are required to in, to deliver on
what Maori land expectations are within the
regional spatial plan.
So why this really matters is currently in its current
form, it disadvantages urban and land called Maori.
Uh, it ties Maori purpose focus to development
to particular land holdings, the quantity, quality
and location of which are being result in historical
injustices, no pathway to reacquire.
So if I can give you an example,
we have a fast track currently going on, uh,
in an area in Canterbury 800 houses.
So it is constantly the public sector that is cleaning up
after the private sector in these 800 houses.
Is there a thought of a school?
Is there a thought of a health hub?
Is there a thought of any transport opportunities?
They're merely just thinking of the houses
a Maori purpose in our view, whether it's Ka for us,
it's about building communities.
And I want to be very clear under,
we're not just building communities for ourselves.
We live under a,
so if I'm looking at acquiring a piece of land, um,
of scale, I'd be wanting to put a master plan over.
I'd be wanting to understand if these 400
houses, we need a ura.
We also need a healthcare center instead
of relying on the public sector to keep on cleaning up
after the private sector on all these things.
Hence why within my submission, I've also asked
for designated authority.
Section 33, I appreciate, it's looking like
that's a little bit up in the air there as well as, um,
it used to be called requiring authority,
but if there was, if I had designated authority,
I could designate the authority of order
and have that special legislation to move a lot faster.
I could use the designation authority,
which was promised under Kemp deeds for hospitals
and schools, and I could also use it as transport.
So, uh, I'm not, so
this is why this matters so much to us
is actually the limiting of the wording.
'cause as we know, the RMA largely focused on
participation in Maori and its planning systems,
but at miss the Maori society, that the economy has, um,
grown opportunity for a new planning work system
to enable the better use of land.
So this is why we're sort of here today
and we are focused our submission on two things,
Maori purpose, zone and designated authority.
How well you working alongside,
as you heard my tribes sit here
before Ranga, this is Ranga.
We're not here with a handout.
We are here with solutions on how to use, um, land properly
and this e you know, to build the economy, not just
for Christchurch, not just for Canterbury,
but it will build the national economy if this was given
to every iwi, uh, that would then enable them
to set their planning
and values over their land to do their things.
But I'll leave it at that and just take questions. Great.
Thank you all. Thank you very much. Rob.
First question to Hannah, please
Thank you so much for bringing the voice of
aka uh, to the center of this committee as you have a, you,
we have a unique perspective as landless peoples.
Uh, and so I just want to acknowledge your strong corridor
or around the importance of, um, providing voice
and the ability to influence and be a part of the system
and guide it in our tribal,
what is the definition of Maori land?
It was great, thank you.
Um, I wanted to ask in terms of the, uh, issue
with the, uh, I think about both Nhu
and their submission earlier,
but then also down to your local level with, um, the AKA
and uh, how as in the urban space you've got these massive,
massive areas of development as you've shared
with the fast track and others,
but you know, the transfer of powers
and that definition of what is Maori and what is not.
Because I think of Maori land also in terms of, uh,
general title land owned
by Maori reservation lands owned by Maori.
Um, and this is very much the type of thinking in terms
of the exclusion,
that if we tighten up the definition too much,
it excludes those of us in urban settings.
Um, so what would be your recommendations in terms
of keeping the flexibility of the wording
to enable us in our across the tu to be able to define
what is the Maori purposes of f of
and how we define ourselves?
'cause we are quite different a across the,
Yeah.
So again, I look at it as, um,
we use, I would, I,
and I'm not speaking for other iwi, I would think
that would use Port.
I would think Tara would use ua.
And I think this is for, um, for us, I mean, to be fair,
we've had a 13 year head start on this.
Um, and so it's for the, to come into a room
and really sit down and understand what your own
around this land looks like.
Um, I, my job is not to set the rule for everybody.
My action from today is I actually think it's super
imperative that we are part
of the national direction wording to ensure
that it's sitting within the regional strategies, uh,
for ready for the spatial plans.
And that should be something along the lines
that the national direction has an expectation to work
with Iwi Maori on the regional strategies in the economy
and what it looks like going forward.
And I think it's the wording that needs to be super clear
and not ambiguous of participation or protection.
Jordan, if I can stop on that, Mr. Chair.
Um, just in relation to transfer of powers
and I think about the opportunity that's available for Maori
to lead in these spaces for the betterment
of all the community, like you've said,
you have a community perspective connected to the T
and the historic intergenerational connection to place.
Uh, we need to retain a transfer
of powers within legislation, uh, to enable Iwi ua,
uh, to uh, develop and share spaces, um,
and execute some of these functions that, that we have yet
to really test across the motu yet.
I might have a different view on that.
I would say yes on reserves.
I think there's a on reserve purpose
and for a transfer of powers,
and I think there's an off reserve purpose for
designated authority.
Uh, that's my personal view on that,
probably not. Thank you. Yeah,
That's great. Thank you
Steve.
Yeah, thank you. Uh, this has been super useful submission.
I wonder if you could sort of expand further
and paint a picture your, as you described them, your, uh,
Ranier described, uh, co-design as a necessity
of the expectation, uh, that Na Tahu has in terms
of its crown relationship.
But it seems like, um, what you articulate
is the value of taking the time to get it right.
Um, and recognizing that we're,
we take a holistic view of a community, housing, schooling,
health, um, we're gonna get the best outcomes
and really to have meaningful, effective development,
whatever you wanna call it, um, it needs to do that.
And that Iwi Maori needs to be at the center of
that co-design of development.
Am I articulating things correctly?
Yeah, correct. So I would, uh, look at it
through the national direction.
Yeah. Uh, through the regional strategy
and through, um, the spatial plan.
Yeah. We would be working alongside our local governments,
uh, and working out what are the borders
and boundaries of what this looks like.
Yeah. Um, my assumption
to be fair, if it was,
and we had received a piece of RFR land
or we knew it was coming,
we would put a master plan over it.
We would work with the authorities.
Well this, you know, in this area, what are the schools
that are around this area?
What is the impact that's gonna be in this area
and how are we going to implement it?
That for me is co-design.
You know, this is the mask
and we are looking at over this specific area, understanding
with all local authorities what is around
and what is actually the very point
and pinnacle that's required.
I'll just stop on the Sure. Yeah.
In terms of this bill that's
before us, um, do you think it's able
to be salvaged
or tweaked to achieve that sort of a vision?
Or is it quite a long way off the mark?
Uh, everybody lives in hope and I'm an opportunist.
Um, to be fair, I, I think if we've gone down from 86 zones
and we're looking at 13, uh, I would like
to be confident that actually what we're trying
to achieve is the right thing to do for the country, uh,
through economy.
So building these zones will also,
my belief will help the social deprivation.
So, um, do I believe this is possible
or am I annoying that I email everybody so much
that people just talk to me 'cause they think of my emails?
No,
I, I, I think it is possible in that
so long as the goal in the bill doesn't preclude
the opportunity, that it's not just focused on
participation of Maori
and it's not just focused on protecting things,
but it actually recognizes that Maori are a significant part
of the growing, you know, a growing part of our community,
our population, and the economy and that,
and Reacquiring lands through whatever means
that will have been ancestral land in the past,
that there's an opportunity to deliver on that.
So the goal is really important.
You could amend the definition of
item what's identified Maori land
or you could make sure that further down the process,
the definition of Maori land is not tied to the zone.
And that ensuring that in
that regional spatial planning process,
Maori are not just consulted.
That they're actually able to participate
and show, determine where the appropriate kind
of locations are going to be for those Maori purpose zone.
So it's following through that process
and the framework to make sure that each step,
you're not precluded and that there is opportunity.
Excellent. Well, thank you.
We've made time, but thank you very much
for your, uh, contribution.
I much, much appreciated. Thanks a lot.
We've now moved to Zoom,
Waiting around on that.
Got
Good. Are they on
You? Turn your sound and camera on please.
Dunedin, see if you can be more
successful than Hamilton.
Oh, you are beautiful. It's very good. Excellent.
Well welcome. Um, uh,
grant Kon tuned Select Committee at the moment.
Uh, we've got 20 minutes with you.
Your submission has been, uh, sent to us.
Uh, we've, you can take it as read how
to use your 20 minutes is entirely over to you.
Um, and, but we gratefully have time for questions far away.
Tan Kto, uh, called David Ward talk.
Um, um, me, I'm the general manager of three Waters,
uh, property and urban development at Dunedin City Council.
Uh, I've been at Dunedin City Council almost four years now.
Uh, prior to that it was up in Auckland for 17 years.
12 years of which I was at Watergate Services delivering,
uh, infrastructure to support evidence-based growth.
Um, just a little bit
of background on myself professionally,
I'm a chartered civil engineer
and a, um, fellow of the Institution of Civil Engineers, um,
from Dunedin City Council's perspective.
We, we, uh, thank the committee for the opportunity
to present to you, uh, uh, today.
Um, we recognize the significance of the reforms, uh,
which council does support,
and we also recognize the significance of you presenting
with, with the opportunity to, uh, provide you our,
our experiences of how it might work in practice.
Uh, I'll hand over to my colleague,
Uh,
Excuse me. Um, we are
struggling to hear you for some reason,
your sound is not nearly as clear as David's.
Yes, I'm closer to the laptop. Can you hear me now? That's
Be great. Thank you.
Yep. Okay, thanks. Um, Cona Johnson talk going on.
I've been the city development manager at DCC
for over 16 years,
and I've been responsible for the Dine spatial plan in 2012.
The second generation district plan notified in 2015
our future development strategy in 2024, along
with several plan changes and
before that have worked in the private sector, um,
consenting development as well
as spatial planning in southeast Queensland.
So I've had a broad range of experience
with planning systems,
and as David says, uh, the council submission supports much
of the intent of reform,
and in particular, we support the intention
to provide greater national direction in a stronger role
for spatial planning as a tool
for aligning land use infrastructure
and investment decisions.
I think having done two spatial plans,
we've really recognized the benefits of these documents
and their increased role under the new system
is strongly supported.
Um, however, we've identified several practical issues
with the proposed system that are outlined
in our submission.
Um, I'm only gonna touch on a few of those today.
Um, our submission is quite long, as you may have seen.
Um, I guess the first thing I'd like
to highlight is the importance
of ensuring the system appropriately supports
strategic growth planning.
And, um, having been in growth involved in growth planning
for a long time, it's important that planning aligns
with long-term infrastructure affordability.
While development must ultimately be market driven,
council still need to be able to assess
where development should occur
and sequence growth in a way that aligns
with infrastructure capacity
and long-term financial sustainability.
It's not just about growth pace for growth in the immediacy
of, um, capital programs
and developers installing infrastructure,
there's a long-term cost to running infrastructure
that needs to be considered.
And in my view, that's not strongly reflected in the
planning bill as written.
If councils are required to enable development in locations
that require premature
or inefficient infrastructure investment
or require higher operating costs long term, the cost of
that infrastructure may not be financially sustainable
for communities, particularly for slower growing communities
and modest growing cities like nato.
So in our case, um, where you have modest
and uneven growth, it's important to be able
to direct development towards area
where there is already infrastructure capacity
or where that infrastructure capacity can be affordably
extended or upgraded if you want
to maintain affordability for rate payers.
So for that reason, we've recommended it in our submission
that the legislation explicitly enables planning decisions
to consider infrastructure affordability for communities
and long-term operational costs when de determining
where development should occur.
And that isn't currently the case.
A related issue is the alignment
between the resource management reforms
and the Water Services Act.
So the water reforms require councils
to undertake significant work over the next several years,
including detailed mapping of water services infrastructure
and network capacity and stormwater risk management plans
and ongoing water service assessments.
At the same time. Those same,
that same information is required for the spatial plans,
but the timeframes between the water services bill
and the planning bill are not aligned.
So we ask that consideration is given
to aligning those timeframes to avoid the need for rework
and to ensure that information is available in time
for the first set of spatial plans.
The second point I wanna move to is about the purpose
and goals of the planning bill.
So the revised framework places a strong emphasis on
enabling development and economic activity, which
of course we support.
However, we're concerned that the current drafting removes
or narrows several matters, matters
that international evidence indicates are important
to achieving well-functioning places
that support a thriving visitor economy, migrant attack,
attraction, and quality of life.
We're particularly concerned about the removal of amenity
and most landscape values, retaining only protection
for outstanding natural landscapes.
And, and there seems to be a reduction in the ability
to recognize and protect for heritage values.
These matters are fundamental elements of place quality
that are recognized in most planning systems.
In fact, I couldn't find a western planning system
that excluded these matters.
And for Dunedin, they underpin our visitor economy
and are really important to attracting people to come live
and work and set up businesses in Dunedin.
We're also concerned about the removal
of the requirements relating to outdoor living space.
Again, this is quite unusual for modern planning systems
over time, that risk creating housing
that does not meet people's needs,
it reduces green space in cities
and pose long-term costs in communities, including
through poor health and wellbeing outcomes.
Our recommendation here is we, we recognize the challenges
of the past and some of these matters being used to delay
and increase the costs of consenting.
And we we're not recommending
that they be reinstated in the way they existed previously.
However, we believe there is a way
of reinstating them in a way that's focused
and clearly defined so they can continue to ensure
that we have quality cities while avoiding the risk
that they can be misused
to allow nimby objections to development.
The third matter is to do
with the implementation timeframes, which has been raised.
I, I think in most council submissions that I've read, um,
the timeframes appear to be overly ambitious, uh,
particularly in relation to the timeframe allowed
for the development of related national direction.
Instruments and standards we're concerned about the
misalignment between the timeframes for the development
of environmental limits under the natural environment bill,
and the first set of spatial planning spatial plans,
which are required to consider those limits,
which won't be known yet.
In my experience,
developing high quality plans requires robust evidence
and analysis, meaningful engagement
and careful integration
with infrastructure planning and investment.
And mistakes are costly.
It is always cheaper and more efficient to do it once
and do it right than to redo your mistakes.
If you make too many, if the timeframes are too compressed,
compressed, there's a real risk of rush plan development,
higher submission volumes,
and the need for subsequent plan changes will,
which will cost more.
So we recommend that the implementation timeframes be
extended or staged,
and in particular that there's also enough time to prepare
and engage on national direction that is well crafted
and reduces the risk of litigation due to clarity issues
and gaps, which has been an issue for Dunedin as we've had
to take, um, some cases to court due to lack of clarity,
national direction, uh, division between the bills.
We're concerned about that.
I know that's been raised in other submissions as well.
There is a real risk that some effects may fall
outside the scope of either bill, for example,
when considering a land use consent under the planning bill,
decision makers may not be able
to assess effects on indigenous by adversity
or the natural environment
because they fall outside the
definition of the built environment.
Or in relation to storm water discharges.
A regional council may not be able to consider the effect
of the discharge on flooding impacts on houses downstream
regulatory relief provisions.
I'm sure you've heard plenty on, on this one,
but I'll just, um, emphasize that in our view,
the concept is fundamentally flawed
and as drafted could expose councils to significant
and unpredictable financial liabilities, as well
as substantial administrative
and legal costs and litigation.
Local government already operates under significant
financial constraints
and councils have limited ability to manage
or ensure against this type of risk.
For this reason, we ask
that the regulatory relief provisions be removed from the
legislation entirely.
And finally, um, we would like to highlight the importance
of allowing flexibility
for sub-regional spatial planning within larger regions.
Regions such as TGA are geographically large
and diverse with disconnected urban areas facing very
different growth pressures across the region,
allowing flexibility within your space
and planning arrangements would enable planning
to reflect these differences while still
maintaining regional coordination.
Thank you for the opportunity to make those opening remarks,
and we would be happy to answer any questions.
Great. Okay. Right.
First question we have from Steve Abel. Yeah. Thank you Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much for an
excellent substandard submission.
Um, in your investigation of overseas regimes,
which you articulated earlier in, in your oral submission,
did you find anything that, uh, was similar in terms
of the regulatory relief space that you've, uh, so
emphatically see it as a terrible idea?
Uh, I didn't look for that specifically.
Uh, when I was looking at other, um, systems,
I was particularly interested in how any systems dealt
with the amenity and the heritage
and the landscape provisions,
which I felt was an unusual change.
Um, so no, I haven't looked at that.
And Paul, yeah.
Is it tenable for, um, this extent of change to
be achieved by a council like yours, um,
at the same time as grappling
with the other significant changes in in planning systems
under this government, such as the fast track legislation?
Or is it sort of gonna swamp you under a, a lot
of new systems, um, that are costly if you're having
to pay regulatory relief
and basically, um,
take away your ability to meet the needs of
your community in terms of what they expect, um, a council
to be doing, protecting the environment,
protecting heritage, uh, ensuring amenity, um,
and, you know, functionally affecting these,
uh, regulatory regimes?
Um, I would say that the amount
and the complexity of change is something that's been raised
by a lot of councils.
Um, I think that a big issue is they seem
to be contradictory and misaligned,
and that's a real problem.
If the, if all of the changes were, um, designed
to work well together,
then potentially they all could
be delivered at the same time.
But they seem to have been developed independently,
the timeframes don't align,
and sometimes the, the outcomes seem to be
counterproductive to each other.
Mm-hmm. I mean, fundamentally, if you want councils
to reduce costs, to rate payers, you want rate capping.
You want those costs to come down.
You want economic development, you have to allow councils to
deliver their services efficiently.
So firstly, that was the point around the,
the infrastructure and spatial planning.
And you cannot add new additional costs that
that can't even be budgeted for like regulatory relief.
It is, it is creating sort of a perfect storm that councils
that could get in the way of the overall outcomes
of delivering the growth that the government is seeking.
Thank you. Thanks. So, uh, thanks
for your submission mind flows on exactly from,
um, Steve Abels.
And my question is why the fear
or the hesitation about the proposed regulatory relief
proposals when it's not retrospective?
And it would only apply if something was a,
a deviation from the existing RMA and district plan rules,
and it would only then potentially caution counsel from
imposing their perception or definition of amenity
and heritage and SNAs when it was,
when it was not duly warranted.
Um, well, in terms of the retrospective,
it does apply retrospectively when those provisions existed,
uh, under the RMA plans, if it's the same landowner.
And there's a sort of a,
an administrative challenge in determining those
retrospective provisions.
And when they do apply, there's, there's the, um, the,
the, the payment or the financial compensation that may come
through the regulatory relief,
but there's also costs due to administration
and litigation at several points
during the regulatory relief system, which, um,
as written are, are likely to be high risks for litigation.
And so there's, it's the unknown quantum of those things.
And also just generally, um,
spending money on administering complex systems
and being involved in litigation isn't an effective use
of community money, in our opinion.
It's, we are better to use the community's money
to deliver things that give them tangible outcomes,
not spending a lot of money in court on lawyers.
So that, I think that's the concern, is that you're not,
you're not delivering
for the community on while using their,
their rate payer money.
Yeah. Okay. Well, I'm gonna check that.
'cause to my understanding it's not retrospective.
Um, but also, I mean, the, the, the opposite argument
to your point, exists whereby you're superimposing on rate
payers, council's view over private property rights.
So yeah, I think it's a, a dubious, uh, query.
But, um, I accept your, uh, your submission and feedback.
Thank you.
Okay. Yeah.
Just to confirm, um, it's one of the things like, it's,
if you go as a council,
and in Denise's case the council, you decide that you want
to put a heritage overlay over a particular part
of the city, which, which potentially could influence the
value of those properties downwards, then if you,
if the community wants to do that, then that's something
that you would have to then weigh up in terms
of giving regulatory relief as in compensation would,
would you not think that's a fair trade off
when you make those decisions?
'cause otherwise it's very easy for authorities
to come over the top of, uh, private property owners
and just, and, um, and, uh,
and put these sorts of rules over.
Well, I guess in the case of decisions,
usually it's not the council making the decision,
the council notifies the plan.
It would be an independent hearing panel
that ultimately makes the decision if people object to them.
And, and they do consider the costs
and benefit of regulation.
I think that's an important part of the system.
And I think it's clearly, um, articulated in the new system.
There will always be, um, costs
and benefits in anything that council does.
If council puts a bus stop outside somebody's house,
it may have a negative effect on them,
but you're providing an ability
for somebody to get on the bus.
And there's countless examples where council has
to do something for the benefit of the broader community
that has some cost to a property owner.
And you cannot, um, afford to compensate every
cost for every service.
And I think the importance is that this regulation be tied
to a clear public benefit and writing the goals
and objectives, so that that's the case.
And I, I think in, in that respect, it is,
it's a fair public benefit
and some private cost that occurs,
I think you'll find the word use a significant impact.
And I think if say you reduce the value
of someone's property by 20%, then that would be seen
as significant, as opposed to a nuisance value
of a bus stop outside the house.
You gotta stop. Yeah. Uh, yeah.
Well, it's actually a different question.
Well, um, okay. You got one minute.
One minute. It's, uh, it's on your point about, uh,
climate change, the absence of climate change in the bill,
or the lack of mention, um, given
that it's the existential challenge of our time,
and as you rightly point out, it affects a multitude
of activities, uh, from agriculture to forestry
to fisheries, um, how strongly do you think it's important
that climate change be in our primary
environmental legislation?
Well, I think climate change mitigation
and adaptation needs to be included.
I mean, it's fundamentally,
the plan is about creating an environment that's
resilient for the future.
And that considers, um, how development may, um,
put people at risk or,
or prevent, um, risks, um, or help mitigate them.
And I think you cannot have that a a planning system
that does not have that front and center.
Okay. Thank look, um, it's, um, you've reached time.
Thank you very much, uh, for your submission.
We are gonna have a 10 minute break now.
So thank you very much,
and I hope the weather's great and cheers. Thank you.
Thank you
To the afternoon submissions, uh, following our break,
and we have trans power with us.
Uh, welcome to the select committee.
You have 20 minutes with us, uh,
and thank you for this very thorough, um, submission.
So we will get you to talk us through, we will open up
for questions.
So thank you
Madam Chair and deputy chair and,
and members, uh, we're very grateful to be here.
My name is, uh, David Knight.
I'm executive General manager, strategy, regulation
and governance at Trans Power.
I, I'm fortunate to have with me our two, uh,
resource management specialists, uh, Joe Moore,
senior Corporate Counsel and,
and Dan Hamilton, uh, strategic planning lead, both
of whom were, were architects and authors of our submission.
So any of the difficult questions, uh, go, go to them.
You'll, of course be familiar with, uh, trans power, uh,
and our assets up and down the country.
We cover, uh, other than the Chatham Islands
and, uh, ro, uh, Stewart Island, uh, we are in every other,
uh, council and, uh, regional council, district councils
and, uh, and city councils up and down the country.
And we have, uh, as, as a number
of infrastructure players do, we are, uh, responsible
for linear infrastructure.
And so that has a difference in terms
of the way in which the, the resource manager
and planning approach, uh, uh, addresses that.
Um, transmission, we believe is, is, uh,
and, and transmission of connection to, uh,
the National Grid is a critical enabler
for economic growth in New Zealand.
And so from our perspective, it's critical
that we get the planning arrangements for that, uh, right.
We are very supportive of, uh, of these bills.
Uh, nonetheless, we have some, uh, observations about, uh,
improvements that will be made, uh,
and, uh, we'll get to those.
And we wanna leave plenty of time for, uh, for discussion
and, and, uh, questions.
We are planning to spend something in the region
of $13 billion over the course
of the next two regulatory periods.
That's a 10 year period. We're in what we call RCP four.
Now, we move into RCP five regulatory control,
period five in 2030.
And we are projecting to spend both on new build
and existing maintenance and, uh,
and upgrades of existing lines, uh, something in the region
of $13 billion.
And so it's critical for us that, uh, that the planning bill
and the natural environment bill are there to support
that sort of, uh, infrastructure investment.
We need both of those bills to work seamlessly together and,
and to be integrated.
Just touching on the new build, uh,
last time we built a new line, uh, went from to Auckland,
uh, covered seven different councils.
Um, it was called in as a board of inquiry.
That inquiry, the hearing itself took 82 days.
Uh, we think there are simpler
and, uh, streamlined approaches that we can take to, uh,
to these new bills as they get incorporated.
We've already heard, uh, uh, our friends at Meridian
and, uh, more recently friends at, uh, at, uh,
Dunedin City Council talk about the litigation risk
around being involved, uh, in trying to work out
what these instruments are going to do.
So our view is that, uh, both of those bills need
to work, uh, very closely together.
And I think about new build, um, uh, deputy chair,
I think about Hamilton East.
We are looking at, uh, at putting in a new
substation somewhere there.
So me, you, we'll be talking to you.
Um, now at some point
or around, we just have staff,
uh, and, and we do have, uh, some issues.
We've reached a, uh, uh, uh, settlement recently
with the owners of, uh, of that land, uh, up there.
And, uh, have, have worked quite closely
with the councils up there about, as you know, uh,
we need, uh, we need that infrastructure build to occur,
and we cannot avoid all sensitive environments.
Uh, and so that's going to be an issue for us
as we work our way through when we talk about
our existing, uh, infrastructure.
So, uh, that's stuff that we already have in the ground now.
Uh, we take a lot of heart from the speech from the throne,
uh, when, when Parliament opened, uh,
we fondly call it the King's speech.
Uh, and that's where, uh, where it was, uh,
posited that, uh, trans power
and transmission infrastructure should be able
to be upgraded as of right.
Uh, so a permitted activity.
And so we are looking to these bills
to see whether we can expand on that, uh, that notion
and what King Charles meant when he said that.
Um, we generally think the bills contain the right tools,
but there's not enough certainty that sits under those.
The various instruments that hang off the back of that, uh,
are still the, uh, the detail around those, uh,
will, will be important.
Um, we are of course, available to assist, uh, both, both,
uh, the ministry and, and the committee if, uh, if needed.
Uh, we are supportive of the funnel approach.
Uh, however, we don't want to repeat the problems
of the existing RMAI mentioned 72, 74 councils up
and down the country, cost us in excess of $13 million
to try and get those planning instruments embedded into city
council, uh, planning rules.
And then finally, uh, just in terms of opening, uh,
Madam Chair, uh,
our submission does contain workable solutions.
Uh, and we, we do want to ensure that the detail is right.
We don't wanna re-litigate
where we've been on national direction, national standards,
uh, and we do want certainty
around transmission infrastructure.
It is different from other linear infrastructure,
it's different from other, uh,
uh, construction infrastructure.
And so, as a consequence, needs a special attention.
I will hand over to, to Dan, uh, to go through some
of the more specific, uh, issues that we had.
Good afternoon. Um,
so the goals in the bill are obviously, uh, clearly critical
for the functioning of, of the whole system.
So if they're not right, then everything that comes
after the end blower down the funnel, um,
as they likely to work as it should.
So I'd like to talk briefly about two key issues
that transfer sees, um,
and the goals that we'd like to, to have addressed.
Um, the first one is around the infrastructure goal
and the planning bill, which currently uses the words, uh,
to plan and provide for infrastructure, um, in the world
of planning law provide for is,
is a very weak, uh, directive.
And other, other goals use stronger language like enable.
So that's why we are requesting that the, the wording
and infrastructure goal, which is Goal B, uh,
be strengthened to say support, enable
and protect infrastructure, um,
and protecting, protecting the existing national grid assets
just, just as important as enabling the new build.
Um, and you only need to live at open, where we've got
around a hundred, 150 Ks worth of, of lines that are,
you know, underbuilt with houses, um, to see why, uh,
or as an example of the development that we're trying
to protect, um, the grid from, uh,
turning now to the natural environment.
Bill, the, the issue for us there is
that there currently is not explicit
infrastructure goal at all.
Uh, and that creates a massive risk for trans power, um,
and all other large scale infrastructure providers for
that matter, um, whereby a project could be allowed under
the planning bill and then full fail
with the natural environment bill and,
and not be allowed, um,
because the benefits aren't a factor in decision making
under, under the ladder bill.
So we're seeking infrastructure goals in both bills
to ensure the system is, um, actually integrated.
And we also believe an infrastructure goal is necessary in
the natural environment Bill, in order to link cause 86,
which, um, helpfully provides the ability
for natural standards to create a co consenting pathway for,
um, significant infrastructure activities that breach
or likely to breach, um, environmental limits.
Uh, turning now to national instruments, um, you know,
one step down the funnel, I think, um, obviously they,
they're a vital piece of the reform
that we haven't seen yet.
And, um, in our opinion,
they will be the central determinant
of whether these reforms actually work or not.
Um, because they sit at the top of the hierarchy
and every other part of the system must implement them.
So the bills are quite clear about
what those instruments the national engineers should do,
which is to give effect to the system's goals,
resolve conflicts between the goals when necessary,
and ensure a coherent nationally
consistent planning framework.
So that's no easy feat.
Um, and I think for the national instruments
to be given the best chance of working for infrastructure,
we're asking for three key things.
So one is engagement with infrastructure practitioners,
uh, during their development.
Two is increasing the timeframes for their development,
and three is improving the process for the development.
So on that first point, engagement, we're asking
for stronger, uh, earlier
and ongoing involvement with infrastructure, um, providers,
um, and developing the national instruments,
including mandatory consultation on full drafts
and any material amendments to those documents.
Um, and I implore the committee
and officials to work with, um, the infrastructure providers
that, um, all have our hands up willing, um,
and able to help make those national instruments work.
Um, on the second point, timeframes, uh,
transparency firmly are the view, the view
that the current timeframes
to developing national instruments are simply to compressed,
um, to deliver the high quality national
direction that we desperately need.
Um, and that compressed timeframe creates an extra risk
combined with my third point, which is, um, the process
by which the national instruments are to be be developed,
which, um, as draft from the bills doesn't include either
the requirement for, uh, drafts to be released for comment.
Um, all the opportunity for submitters to be heard, uh,
both the, which are important safeguards
that would certainly help, um, ensure that robust
and comprehensive national instruments are developed.
Um, and without those safeguards, we think, um,
there's a real risk of having national instruments
that simply don't do what they need to do.
So, um, page 34 of our submission,
we set out amendment seeking, um, changes to, uh,
schedule one of plus, uh, sorry, plus five schedule one
of the planning bill to double the timeframe
for the development of the national policy direction
and the first set of national standards.
So going from nine months to 18 months, and on pages 34
and 35 of our submission, we have set out changes
that we're seeking, um, in order
to make consultation within infrastructure operators
during development of national instruments mandatory, um,
as well as changes that we're seeking, um, to add the option
of a board of inquiry hearing, um,
on proposed national instruments.
And I'll now pass it over to Ms. Moore.
Okay. So I'd like to talk about designations.
Um, trans power's obviously a heavy user
of the designation tools in the RMA.
We've got at least 170 designations around the country.
Um, and we expect that
with our increased new build, we'll need more.
So it's really important that that test works for us.
So at the moment, the decision decision making test has been
amended from the RMA
and we are now required if the bills were passed in their
current form to carry out the assessment
of the strategic need to be in a particular location.
And for linear infrastructure, that's almost impossible
because we will be connecting an A to B
and you could have numerous routes.
So it would be really difficult to say we have
to be in a particular place.
I mean, we do a route selection process where we consider,
you know, a long list to short list
and any of them could potentially work.
So what we are suggesting is that instead of being required
to carry out that assessment of the strategic need, um,
what we, what we do instead is,
is set out the benefits of the project.
'cause we understand that that test was meant to be
focusing on benefits of the project rather than,
rather than the remainder of the designation test,
which is about the adverse effects.
So we've set out some, some amendments, um, to clause 13
of Schedule five in our submission.
And we've also sought similar, um, amendments
to the spatial plan provisions in relation
to future designations, where you also have
that strategic need test.
And I should note that we,
we do always have a strategic need for our projects
that's tested through the Commerce Commission process.
And, and we think that's the right place
for that testing to occur.
Um, the second point I'd make in relation to designations is
that we support, uh, the provisions
and the bill that try to align, um,
or provide more choices to whether you are able
to rely on a designation as compared
to seeking a resource consent under the national standards.
In the RMA, we have a problem
with the NSS Trump designations.
And so that tool has been removed for us.
Um, so the, um, the second point I'd like
to focus on is spatial planning.
And in our submission, we've, we've sought a number
of changes to make sure that that tool is available
for us to use.
And in that regard, we,
we support future designations being included
and key infrastructure.
Um, we do want to make sure
that our sequence projects can be included, um,
and that there is the ability for infrastructure operators
to, to seek a review, um, of those spatial plans.
And then probably the, the final point I'll make is in
relation to permitted activities.
And I assume others have made this comment as well, that
as drafted permitted activity provisions are really
confusing and difficult to understand.
They appear to require mandatory registration,
which would be a huge administrative burden.
They also provide for councils
to decline permitted activities, which seems a bit perverse
because if it's permitted, you can do it onto the RMA.
So we've sought some changes to make sure
that permitted activities are genuine permitted activities,
and we are happy to take questions.
Brilliant. Thank you very much for your submission.
Uh, look, we'll go first to Steve Abel, who has a question.
Um, thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you very much for your sort of standard submission.
I wonder if I can take you to your
section on climate change.
Uh, you point out that, uh, uh,
new Zealand's climate change objectives,
including the statutory target
of achieving net zero greenhouse gas emissions hinge on the
rapid electrification of the economy.
Mm-hmm. Um, you go on to say that, um, point 27,
that climate change adaptation is indirectly addressed in
the natural hazard goal.
However, the goals do not expressly encourage climate change
mitigation actions. And you propose,
Um, Uh, change to, uh, clause 11 PB
to add in to support reductions in green gas emissions
and adaptation to the effects of climate change.
Can you speak to the importance of
that from your point of view?
Do we cover that? Um,
I guess from my, I'd say yeah,
transmission infrastructure is climate infrastructure.
It's, it's a key enabler of decarbonizing the economy
and helping us move towards our climate target.
So that's, you know, I think that's largely why we got that
In there. So you've gotta mention
it in this piece of legislation
to really clarify the importance of it. We think so, yeah,
I was actually asked a supplementary on that.
'cause I it was, it was my question too,
'cause you'd obviously pointed that out.
And I suppose given that recent events
with Cyclone Gabrielle
and obviously your whole infrastructure system being wiped
out, like is that kind of the very front
of mind for you at the moment?
Well, absolutely in the sense that, uh,
there's, so there's two aspects to it.
One is the resilience of the existing grid
and ensuring that we can get in, uh, to, to, uh,
both build a resilient grid in the first place.
And that means upgrading existing infrastructure. Yeah.
But also moving quickly, uh, when required, as we did in,
uh, uh, following cycling Gabrielle
and rerouting lines, uh, to get supply back into, uh,
into toity and into Haws Bay in particular.
And so, uh, a legislation that acknowledges that, uh,
and gives, uh, credence to it, uh,
we think is an important balance.
So how do you think, though,
that writing the word within a goal, um,
within the legislation, would achieve the outcome
and solution that you are after?
It gives you, it gives you something
to hang your operations off.
And so if you're talking about climate change now,
I'll give you an example, uh, out outside of,
of resource management, the Commerce Act, uh,
and the various, uh, elements that sit under, under
that don't include, uh, climate change as a key benefit
that you can add to a cost benefit situation.
We think that's a mistake.
We, uh, we've lobbied hard to try
and have that added back in there so
that you can include climate change, benefits, resilience,
climate change adaptation as part
of the overall program work that you're doing.
Because that's the other part of it is the adaptation,
which obviously just mentioned.
Um, okay. If,
if no other members have any questions, I actually good.
I another one had another one, um, around permitted activity
because, um, that's something that's come up quite, uh,
regularly over our submission process.
Um, you also raise it.
Can you just elaborate a little further on
that implication for, for you?
Yeah, I can do that. So, at the moment, under the NES
for electricity transmission, a lot of our maintenance
and routine works are permitted as aright.
So we can, we can go and do them, you know,
provided we have appropriate management in place, whereas,
and, and we anticipate that that will continue.
I guess what we are seeking from the bills is it's
that the permitted activity regime sheet
continues, but expands.
And so if the, so rather than having registration, you know,
through the national standards, we come up
with greater permitted activity rules
that set appropriate standards that we can meet.
So rather than having sort of the administrative burden
of consents for known activities
and known effects, we can draft rules that,
that do the same thing.
But do you think that in the current form
that the bills are written around the permitted activity,
that you would feel that there's more compliance
and general maintenance activity that you're trying
to carry out on your infrastructure?
Yes. We could end up in a situation
where we can't do anything as of right.
That we have to go to the council
and register our activity, set out how we meet the rule
before we can do anything.
And then the council has to assess whether we meet the
relevant rule before we can do anything.
So that would be a massive step backwards
Compared to The RM A currently. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. A massive step backwards.
Okay. No, that's, uh, useful information.
Thank you. Um, grant.
Yeah. Um, the designations was, and, um,
and the whole, I suppose, interaction with Public Works act.
Mm-hmm. Um, uh, your experience
through the Waikato 20 years ago now mm-hmm.
Thereabouts, obviously, um,
I suspect still scars to company.
It was quite an experience.
And, and, and the interaction with landowners, how you, you,
you've obviously said it was such a significant thing you'd
wanna try and tie that process up.
Are you still confident you'll be able to, um,
'cause landowners obviously quite rightly given me more.
Okay. You ultimately got the right
to do it, but there's a process.
Are you confident that with
what you're proposing you'll still be able to work
with the landowners in that space?
Well, yes. Yes, we are.
I mean, uh, as, as you all know, uh, the worst way
to start an 80 year relationship with someone is to say,
we're going to compulsory acquire your land.
Uh, and, and so we work very hard with, uh, with landowners,
uh, once a route is, is, uh, determined.
We are very slow to use the Public Works Act.
In fact, in, in my time at Transparent,
which is almost 20 years now, we've only used it once,
and that was for a, a small piece of land in,
uh, in Southland.
So, uh, we are, we have submitted
to the select committee on changed public
works that will help.
Uh, but it's not the only, uh, instrument
that we need assistance with, uh, you know,
that will reduce processes
currently three years down to two years.
But it's still a very long time
and it still requires, uh, you know,
heavy negotiation between those.
The best way to approach it is on a, uh, a, a
solid negotiation basis.
Um, parties, it's hard to do.
But we'll just take one last question from Julianne
who has had her hand up.
She's just online. Um, so Julianne
Can't Hear you. Julian, we
can't hear you.
Julianne, you just need to put your microphone on there.
Okay. We still can't hear you there.
Just wanna try a different, um, okay.
Well we might just, um, we'll go to Steve, um,
since we can hear you, Steve. Um,
Paragraph 31, in terms of the language
around Clause 11 D it currently is what it is
to achieve no net loss in indigenous biodiversity,
which has been widely criticized sufficient.
You're proposing to weaken that even further to change it
to, to protect where appropriate indigenous biodiversity.
Who is gonna designate where it's appropriate?
Well, I think this is, this is a goal that will,
will then be implemented
and expanded upon like the other goals
in the national direction.
So I guess there's that opportunity for DOC
and others to be involved in that process.
In terms of the substance of our submission,
what we are con concerned about
is a similar issue to what Meridian raised.
Ours is on a much narrower scale.
And I think the, the example we've used in our submission is
we, we have to trim vegetation around our assets Sure.
Because it grows around them. And we just can't avoid that.
And we, we do that in Docker state from time to time.
And, you know, any mandatory requirement
for no need loss just can't be achieved
because Doc doesn't want us replanting in docket state.
They don't want species from out of the area brought in.
So that's what we are concerned about is a,
a mandatory requirement
that could end up being a barrier to our work.
Seems to me your explicit problem could have the effect
of weakening protections across every other developmental
activity when really you're trying
to solve a specific problem for trans power.
Well, I think our will be frank, our submission is trying
to address our concerns. Yeah. But
If that was addressed by another means, we wouldn't have
to weaken the whole framework.
Yeah. I think we'd need to see the language around that.
But I mean, the, the principle point that, that, uh,
Joe makes is, is real and we face it every day.
Uh, so, uh, a watering down of that
and making it more difficult, uh,
for us in those situations would be a retrograde step.
Uh, so if if there were another mechanism to achieve that,
uh, then, then we'd be open to have a look at that for sure.
Probably the, the other point I would make is, um,
in our submission we have, we have proposed,
I guess the payment of a fund, you know, contributing
to a fund rather than necessarily doing offsetting
ourselves in some instances.
Certainly we've had discussions
with Doc about work they're doing that they would be,
you know, focusing on the best biodiversity in an area
rather than, you know, remove one tree, plant another.
So better outcomes overall.
Look, thank you very much.
We are going to have to wrap it up there,
but, uh, a great submission, uh, very thorough
and some good considerations.
So appreciate your time today. Thank
You. Thanks. Full time.
Thank you. Um,
and keeping with the theme of energy, uh,
we welcome our next submitter, which is Energy Resources
roa, who are here in person.
Welcome this afternoon to the select committee.
Welcome. You have 20 minutes with us, uh,
so we'll hand it over to you to talk us
through your submission, and then
we'll open it up for questions.
Thank you, chair, lovely to see you again,
and thank you committee for the opportunity
to speak to you this afternoon.
Um, look, I'm John Carnegie.
I'm Chief Executive of Energy Resources.
Um, and with me, my colleague James Corwell is our policy
director, upstream
and environment, um, a a little about who we are.
We are New Zealand's Peak Energy advocacy organization, uh,
representing the entire energy value chain.
Uh, we exist to enable constructive collaboration across the
energy sector through
and beyond our transition to a lower emissions economy.
And our members have a common interest in robust public
policy settings, and our focus is advocating
for systemic solutions across the energy sector.
And before moving to our submission, I, I do wish
to briefly acknowledge
how much work has gone into these bills
and more broadly, into resource management reform
over, over recent years.
And in fact, the work that the full range
of submitters have undertaken, um, to respond,
the public policy discord over the past decade
has felt like it has almost been dominated, um,
by a discussion on how
to improve our resource consenting system
and how to best balance a range of competing needs,
excuse me, as we grant access to,
and the use of our environmental domains.
So we hope that this debate is, um,
perhaps it's a full on hope as nearing its conclusion.
And we avoid the almost endless tinkering, um,
that we have seen with the RMA since its passage into law.
Um, now we've separately
provided the committee with, um, a high level snapshot
of our view of the various key elements
of the two bills in front of the committee.
Look, this summarizes our submission of
what is effectively a helicopter view.
Um, and, and I won't, uh, talk directly to that.
I'll in fact quickly run through our main points.
But first off, we support the bills, um,
and the intent for resource management reforms
to promote development
and economic growth while protecting the environment
with a focus on property rights.
It's widely acknowledged
and accepted that the costs
of the existing legislative regime have outweighed its
benefits, both environmental and economic.
For some considerable time
and efforts have of course been made to rectify this,
but they have not stuck and we find ourselves here again.
So there is also broad consensus
that consenting in New Zealand has become expensive,
time consuming and unpredictable, um,
actively constraining growth infrastructure
and product productive development.
Thankfully, and I hope finally we have moved on from
believing that this can be solely, this can be solely fixed
by providing high quality resource management plans.
Uh, this of course is only half the picture.
Uh, the other half is the growing plan
and rules based Gulf that now separates
how the RMA was intended to operate.
Um, and that's in the legitimate protection
of public interest in the environment, uh,
from its increasing use via plans
and rules to reallocate private property rights in order
to achieve often opaque or highly dubious public goals.
So the act has become a tool, excuse me,
to increasingly extend the ambit of government regulation
of private rights in the name of the public interest.
And this has involved the progressive blurring
of the boundary between public
and private interests, in favor of determining
public interest by a process of constant legislative
and judicial review and adjustment,
and by regulatory creep by local authorities.
So nowhere is this truer than for energy projects.
Um, in the energy sector,
our guiding framework is called the energy trimmer.
Uh, this tool provides a framework
that highlights the challenge of balancing three critical
and often competing objectives in the energy sector.
It's energy security, energy affordability,
and environmental sustainability.
But superpower is to make transparent the trade offs
between these three dimensions
and to help improve energy system decision making.
This should and appropriately does flex
to accommodate shifting priorities.
But to do so, it needs friends like the resource consenting
regime to do likewise and put bluntly.
It has not, it has failed
to assist in making people more prosperous
through energy abundance.
In fact, New Zealand is currently at the opposite end
of the abundance spectrum facing shortages
and an unpredictable energy future.
And a part of this lies at the feet
of the resource consenting regime.
And, but back to the bills in front of us, we agree
with the aims of the new legislation to improve the quality
and speed of decision making and reduce unnecessary barriers
and rear take so better decisions sooner.
Greater standardization,
including more nationally set standards should
improve efficiency.
And in principle, this consistency, certainty,
and streamlined consenting
should give investors the confidence that they need
to invest in our natural resources.
And while the scope of the bill is broad,
the bills are broad.
We are focused on key areas that affect energy
and, uh, resource the resources sectors,
the specific elements of the bill
that we particularly support, uh, the proposals
for spatial planning, uh, the environmental limits exception
for significant infrastructure,
and the one year processing, uh, time limit
for specified energy activities and regulatory
and the regulatory relief provisions.
Uh, those provisions
and the bills serve to protect property rights
and should be retained if not enhanced.
And while at a central government level,
we have some experience of the magnitude of damage
to investments and investors
that can be done when property rights are damaged.
Now this damage is ongoing
and New Zealand still faces perception risks
with international investors as an uncertain place
to invest at a time when investment is crucial to combat
our energy shortages.
Invest investors have a legitimate expectation that their,
their investments made today are going to be safe tomorrow.
And based on this experience, it is our view
that local government should never knowingly
and deliberately derogate private property rights in new
rules without compensation.
So if considering this statement in demand
and supply terms, a zero price on regulation is always going
to mean that the demand for regulations will be high,
while the voluntary supply of property rights
and return will be very low.
So the new the new spatial planning framework will provide
long term strategic direction and identify development areas
and strategic sites.
We support providing this focus
for development over the coming decades.
Now, this is particularly important for energy projects
with very long delivery lead times,
and we are pleased to see
that the one year processing time limit
for decisions on specified energy activities has been bought
into line with the new, has been bought into the new regime
with thermal electricity generation facilities included in
the definition, intermittent renewable generations such
as solar and wind is vital,
but requires firm capacity to ensure a stable operation
of New Zealand's electricity grid when the sun doesn't shine
and the wind doesn't blow.
So we consider the exception for significant infrastructure
that may breach environ environmental limits
to be a constructive
and pragmatic provision that is essential in ensuring
that critical infrastructure has a clear consenting pathway.
And this is stated in the explanatory material
to cover energy networks,
but we believe should also include full fuel production
and energy supply sites such as power stations
and gas processing plants.
So, briefly to our concerns, having said all this much
of the detail about the new planning system will op,
how it will operate is yet to come
and to being in national policy directions
and national standards.
Uh, these documents will of course be critical,
particularly in relation
to future infrastructure development,
but it's vital that there is full
and genuine consultation, including with industry
and infrastructure providers on the
new national instruments.
We are also concerned about the short windows
to develop the NA National Instruments
and Spatial plans while ensuring that the content
and approach are appropriate.
It is crucial that they are evidence-based
and rely on robust science
with technical input from experts in the field.
The system based fuel
and technology agnostic approach
to managing energy infrastructure should be taken
when the new national instruments are drafted.
The simply HARs back to the original intent of the RMA
to focus on effects and not activities.
Investors based on the needs of consumers are best place
to determine which technology
or fuel should proceed subject to its effect.
And there are a number of economic and infrastructure
and development goals have been included in the bills.
But we think that the inclusion of an energy specific goal
and the planning bill is warranted.
Given the strategic
and a high public interest in the sector,
we support the general approach that has been taken
to the goals and the bills, particularly excluding the,
the effects of climate change.
For the avoidance of doubt, we absolutely recognize
that local authorities carry a heavy burden at the forefront
of dealing with climate impacts.
And they have a crucial role in our collective efforts
to respond to the impacts of climate change.
However, in exercising their duties
and obligations under these bills, the principle should be
that they should be colorblind when it comes to the nature
of fuels and technologies that investors plan to invest in.
And that climate change policy is most efficiently managed
nationally through the emissions trading scheme in the
Climate Change Response Act.
On the whole, the bills represent positive step forward in
aiming to produce a simpler
and more streamlined planning system.
Once a few issues have been addressed, we consider
that the new regime will be beneficial for the energy
and resources sectors and
consequently for the New Zealand economy
and its wider society,
what we especially need is consistency and policy stability
and resource management.
There will always be differences, of course, at the margins,
but we are calling for cross party consensus on the key
elements of these reforms.
Again, we thank the committee for the opportunity
to present our submission,
and I look forward to answering any questions that you,
you may have in the remaining time.
Brilliant. Thank you very much for that submission.
Uh, we've got a few questions.
We will start with David McCloud.
Thank you. And thank you for the, uh, submission.
Um, I just wanted to particularly look at the, uh,
private property rights
and the regulatory relief part of your submission.
You've, you've given a few bit of detail there, uh, on it.
And you, you're talking there in para 69 about the need
for this to potentially be strength.
Could you tell us, uh, a bit more about that
and why that's the case?
Yeah, look, thank Thanks David.
Um, look, just going back to first principles
and Princip, the principle itself
for regulatory relief is fairly straightforward.
And that is if the public wants something new
to be in the public interest and regulated by the act
because they will benefit from it,
the public should pay for it.
Um, and what that principle does is it recognizes
that local democracy
and the ability for communities to make their choices
relevant to their communities is important as just
that such choices are not costless.
Um, so we talk about those provisions certainly being
maintained if not strengthened.
They, they currently only allow
for relief if there's a significant impact,
which is quite a high threshold.
Um, it's also arguable that relief should be available
for any material reduction in land value caused
by a new restriction that's imposed for public benefit.
And access to relief is also limited.
Um, it effectively is only available
for s on specified topics, um,
and relating to a list of measures
and also the environmental limits on a range
of other domains such as freshwater air
and coastal water are not covered.
And we believe they also warrant further consideration.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. And Steve Abel,
Thank you. Um,
um, you talk about treating
The systems as agnostic
and you say there should be no arbitrary distinctions
between fossil fuel related and renewable infrastructure,
but it's not an arbitrary distinction.
Climate change, is it because fossil fuels cause it
and renewables are a solution to it?
So if we are to deal with the existential challenge
of climate change, surely we should be making
a special preference for renewable infrastructure
that's gonna help us solve that existential challenge.
Well, it look, thanks for the question.
Look, it certainly is a challenge that we all face
and we certainly agree with the, the net zero, uh, target
by 2050.
I guess the issue for us is to bring it back to this bill
and it's important to look at why the changes are required
and that's to make consenting processes more efficient
and get the infrastructure that New Zealanders
need built faster.
And so I guess our principle when addressing
that very issue, Steve, is that those
who can best assess the risk
and develop a framework for it should do so.
And I'm assuming that's why health
and safety isn't included in this bill
because that's dealt within a completely separate regime.
And so to our point in a similar vein, we believe that
as important as climate change policy is
and should continue to be, it should be set nationally
through mechanisms such as the Emission Australian scheme
and the Climate Change Response Act,
A supplementary from Steve and then David.
So by that argument,
and you make the point in paragraph 53,
petroleum infrastructure should be on the same
footing as renewables.
Doesn't that betray a fundamental denial
of the need to make a transition?
No. You're taking a strong position essentially on climate
change being excluded from consideration
when it's the challenge of our time of
The, it may well be the challenge of our time, Steve,
but I'm saying within the ambit of this bill,
which is primarily around consenting
that it should not be considered.
There are other legislative
and other frameworks
that more than adequately address the problem
and are better fit for purpose than including
that requirement in this, in this bill.
Thank you. And there, there are other submissions
who have raised a similar point,
but then obviously we heard from Trans Power
before who had a different view as well.
So David, so
You mentioned about the goals section 11 of the bills.
Um, and you, you talked about energy E Energy is sort
of a all encompassing one.
We, we had a previous submitter, uh, one
of the Gen Taylor submit that they'd like a goal
that's directly aimed at, um, uh, renewable
energy generation.
Uh, and I I'm asking you the question,
energy is far wider than that.
Yep. So can you give us the context
of why potentially is energy,
not specifically just renewable energy
that's important as a goal?
Well, we believe it's important, David,
because the energy system is just that it's a system.
And in fact, part of the problem we are in now is
that we have had difficulty consenting thermal
or fossil fuel power beaking plant.
And that's part of the issue
with our current energy shortages.
So yes, you could do just renewable,
but if you want part of it to get more renewables,
you actually also need supporting thermally, right?
So the the two are different sides to the same coin.
Um, and if you only have one half of the coin,
you actually will run yourself into the problems.
Actually, we're observing now. Thank
You. Yeah, thank you.
Uh, look, we'll go
to Cameron Luxton online.
Thank you chair. Um, I've just got a question about the
jurisdiction of these bills, um, being only
inside the 12 mile limit.
But I mean, how, how well does that, the regulator outside
of the 12 mile limit work for members of your, uh, sector
that are trying to deliver gas
and energy to fuel New Zealand's economy
and how, how does it work like the, the scope of the spills
inside the 12 mile limit, but how's it working
outside the 12 mile ofer?
Yeah, look, tha thanks, um, I mean, uh, I,
I have to acknowledge that, uh, we have such a wide range
of members that this is of particular interest
to the petroleum producers.
So petroleum infrastructure you'd appreciate can be both
inside and outside of the 12 mile, 12 mile nautical number.
And actually, with that definition, with that distinction,
actually treated and subject to very different regimes.
So platforms can be as far out to see as we've got Maui
and Maori, which are, uh, I think, uh, 25
and 50 miles respectively.
So well outside the limit could be, um,
or close to shore within a few miles, I think, which is ura.
Um, and of course, pipelines cover, um, the, um,
the limit and come ashore.
And I guess the issue for our perspective is
that having multiple regimes
and regulators for effectively the same, in fact,
it is not just effectively,
it is the same infrastructure as counterintuitive.
And so our operator members have found it difficult, costly,
and time consuming to consent infrastructure,
particularly in the EEZ.
And with decommissioning looming for mature fields
that are approaching end of life,
these problems actually could become exacerbated.
And so it might make more sense to have a single regime
and regulator, or in fact, to have a single point of contact
and government, particularly
for decommissioning obligations.
And I, I guess one of the, the considerations
for the committee is extending spatial plans, um, out
to the EEZ may also be a useful initiative.
Thank you. Look, we'll take one last question from
Priyanka, and then we'll have to wrap it up.
Thank you. Uh, Madam Chair, mine's really a sub
to Steve's, um, question.
And it's, um, in relation to the point
that some others submitters have made, um, contrary
to yours, that climate change mitigations
and greenhouse gas emissions should be included in this
bill, because while it is about consenting, as you've said,
it's also about protecting the natural environment.
Um, but even if you just look at it from a planning point
of view, would you not agree that, um, planning decisions
that allow, um, uh, high emissions development means
that the cost will just be shifted to taxpayers businesses,
um, and households in the future?
Um, well, that's a, a rather big question with a big,
uh, supposition.
Um, look, I, my instinctive reaction is
to go back to, again, to first principles
and to say that whoever is best placed
to manage the risk should,
or at least develop the regime within the risk with
that's managing the risk.
And in fact, um, I, I do believe,
or I had thought that there was going to be an adaptation,
um, bill at some point.
So, you know, if there's a, a separate legislative regime
for adaptation, how will that fit with this?
So, I, my my, my presumption is
that you have a legislative regime which is fit for purpose,
and it doesn't need to, because
otherwise you could actually,
what you could do is use a spill
for a dumping ground mm-hmm.
For all sorts of objectives.
And actually what you're, exactly what you're trying
to avoid is actually pull those out
and have them treated under the appropriate regimes.
Look, thank you very much, John,
for your submission today.
We appreciate your time and your insights.
Uh, but we'll have to wrap it up there. So thank you.
Yep. Thank you very much.
So we now call for our next submitter, uh,
natural Hazards Commission, who are all here in person.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us.
Thank you for your submission.
Uh, we'll hand it over to you to talk us through it,
and then I'm sure there'll be plenty of questions.
Thank you, uh, chair.
Um, and thank you for the opportunity, uh,
to hear our submission today.
Uh, my name is Joe Horwick.
I'm the Chief Resilience Officer
at the Natural Hazards Commission.
This is my colleague Sarah Jane.
She's head of risk reduction. This is my colleague Wendy.
She's our champion of land use planning.
So that's quite relevant here.
Um, so when you work in natural hazards,
people often ask us, what's the single biggest thing
that could reduce the impact of disasters?
And I think most of us agree
that it's not better emergency response capability.
Mm-hmm. It's not better hazard models.
It's not even better engineering.
It's making sure our planning system consistently steers
development away from the very highest risk places
in the first place.
Most of the losses New Zealand experiences from natural
hazards are not caused by the hazard itself.
They're caused by the exposure we create over time
through the decisions we make on where we build
and how we build, how our land is used,
how intensively we build,
and whether risk is recognized early enough
to shape good decisions.
Those decisions accumulate over decades
when they recognize natural hazard risk.
The impacts of events can be manageable when they don't.
The costs are measured in lives, lost houses,
damaged disrupted communities,
and very large recovery bills.
Through the claims we receive under the Natural Hazards
Insurance Scheme.
We see the consequences
of those decisions very clearly
in the claims that we receive.
Many of the losses we deal with arise from development
that has occurred in places where the risk is already known.
That is why land use planning is one
of the most powerful risk reduction tools
available to New Zealand.
Natural hazard losses are not just insurance losses.
They fall across the system on households,
on local government,
on infrastructure providers, and on the crown.
When insurance cover narrows
or declines even more of tho those costs shift
to household and government.
And we're seeing that, um, quite recently,
planning decisions therefore shape not only the physical
risk, but long-term fiscal exposure as well.
For that reason, these bills are important.
They're not just about improving planning processes.
They're about whether New Zealand's planning framework
consistently recognizes
and manages natural hazard risk at its least costly
intervention point.
Once development is in place, the choices available
to us are much narrower and far more costly.
In our view, the draft legislation represents a
significant step forward.
In particular, we strongly support the move towards
risk-based planning
and the clearer expectation
that natural hazard risk must be
considered in decision making.
The test will be in how it's
implemented and operationalized.
There are significant opportunities,
but we also need to guard against inconsistent practice.
So our submission focuses on a small number
of targeted changes
that we believe will help the system work more clearly
and consistently in practice.
Um, those are in our written, written submission,
but I'll just summarize.
First, we recommend including a definition
of risk-based planning in the legislation.
The concept is central to the new framework,
but without a shared definition that there is a risk
that different councils
and decision makers apply it in different ways.
A clear definition would support consistent
interpretation and implementation.
Second, we recommend ensuring the framework can respond
where natural hazard risk becomes significant,
including situations where existing land use rights may
otherwise prevent risk reduction.
Third, we suggest
that the legislation provide a nationally consistent
mechanism to address situations
where serious natural hazard risk to life is identified
at present councils deal with these situations in a range
of different ways, which can create uncertainty
and uneven outcomes.
Finally, we recommend maintaining consistency
between the new legislation
and existing standards where possible so
that the overall system remains coherent
and workable for councils, developers, and communities.
So in short, we think these bills provide a
really strong foundation.
The changes we propose are modest but important.
They're intended to improve clarity, consistency,
and practical operability so
that the planning system can more effectively manage natural
hazard risk support, safer development over time,
and reduce avoidable social and fiscal costs in the future.
Thank you again for the opportunity to present,
and we'd be happy to answer any questions.
Brilliant. Well, thank you very much for that.
Uh, really interesting, obviously keeping natural hazards,
uh, at the forefront of all of this.
So, um, Cameron Luxton has
a question. We'll go to him first.
Uh, thank you chair. Um, thank the commissioner.
I've just, my question's about how do you see risk-based,
uh, risk planning, um, working in an MPD?
Like do how, and specifically, I don't know if it's a sub to
that, but specifically kind of, um,
do you put numbers on it?
So say if you're in Taranaki underneath, you know, in the,
in the volcanic, um, ash area of Mount Taranaki, do you need
to put a one in 200 year event on that?
Or if you're in a flood zone, like where I, uh,
a tsunami zone potentially, like where I am in Papa Moore,
um, you know, you put a one in 400 or one in 10,000.
I mean, have we got, have you got numbers
to these that you could say?
Or does it all have to be sort of, um, language
and defined by, by words in court cases?
Um, I think some of that's gonna depend on, um,
how the national direction is going to be developed
and what's used as a basis for that.
So at the moment we have the national policy statement
for natural hazards,
and in there there is a, um,
matrix in there which has different likelihoods, um,
associated with it, whether or not that goes far enough
or could, um, be extended to be more hazard specific
as something that could be looked at as part of
that national direction.
Okay. So just if I can just sub just quickly then Yes.
Yes. Go camera. Thank you Chair.
So, so your, so just to be clear, your definition
of proportionate and risk-based
you think could be established through existing,
um, information?
Yes. Okay. Thank you.
And Grant has a supplementary,
It strikes me as do you work or take note
or discuss with the, um, insurance companies in this space?
'cause obviously their business is risk assessment
and, you know, interesting thoughts.
Uh, yes. I mean, we, we have a relationship
with the private insurers.
Um, you know, uh, they, they certainly assess risk.
They might have the same understanding of technical risk
to a council, but obviously
after that there's layers on top.
So insurance company will have, uh, matters of reinsurance
to consider matters of competition commercial edge.
Whereas cancels then probably put a more
of a social outcome layer over the top
And, and it's up on that.
So. And how important then is,
'cause I, a case recently I read where people had,
they got a humongous premium, uh, based on a map
that the insurance company was based using on flood risk,
flood risk crashing.
Yeah. And then suddenly they appealed,
it turned out the map was wrong.
So how, how, obviously the importance
of getting the correct mapping and information is crucial.
How, what, uh, I presume you pay a really important part,
part in that, or does there need
to be more work done in that space?
Um, anyone wanna say that?
Yeah, I mean, it's a very correct observation,
and there is a huge amount of uncertainty in any
of the scientific modeling.
Um, we do, but in lieu of that,
we can't let it stop us making decisions.
Um, we, we have quite strong relations across the, um,
science, uh, sector, um, as well as with the private sector
with people that are investing in these, these models.
So, um, I think we have to recognize
that there is, um, uncertainties,
but that doesn't mean that we can lack
confidence in making decisions. So,
And, and just finally, because I just, it's interesting,
we, uh, recently undertaken on instigated some, uh,
flood modeling in the dag wall from Northern
Wire catchment space.
Um, and as part of that process, they go, they,
they do their modeling and then they actually go
and truth test it with locals
and ask them, well, this is what our model says will happen.
Well, and then, so actually no,
this happened last time it flooded.
I mean, is is it, does it get down to
that level from your experience?
Yes, definitely. I mean, we've,
and not just for flooding, for other hazards too, we've got,
um, a tsunami database that includes quite a lot of, um,
reconciliation from oral histories.
Mm-hmm. And exactly what you've just said, people that have
observed different, um, impacts.
I think the other thing that we add value in is we publicly
show our settled claims
for different natural hazard events since 1997.
Mm-hmm. And that goes quite away, um, to validate some
of these, um, models that are publicly available
because you can layer up the modeling with impact data.
And in many cases that that shows that the,
the models have quite a lot of accuracy.
And I might just take a supplementary off that
because it's quite topical to
what I was interested in asking you, uh,
coming from a region that was devastated
by cycling Gabrielle, and then obviously, um,
they rezoned a lot of land to category three, um, red zone,
where obviously they cannot build there anymore, uh,
because there's risk to life.
Um, obviously that's quite controversial around, um,
some communities that don't believe that
that should have been, um, red zoned.
But here in, in the, your submission,
you talk about the Clause 49, um,
and talking about councils already using life safety
thresholds in district plans,
and that's obviously a recommendation that you are making.
Can you just elaborate a little further on that and,
and why you are recommending that?
Okay. So some examples of
where it's been used is in Christchurch mm-hmm.
After the Canterbury Earthquakes where,
particularly in the Port Hills, um, a lot of sort
of science went on there
and they actually match, um, risk lines,
which then got put into the district plan around
Rockfall Boulder roll Cliff collapse.
Um, and they had mass movement as well.
So there you've got lines in the district plan sort
of reflecting those different, um, the risk, um,
and it was risk to life in that, in that situation.
So, um, another example is in, uh, Whakatane district,
um, in matata where they also did a sort of managed, uh,
relocation of that, um, settlement
after the debris flow, um, where that was also based on
a risk assessment and the risk to life.
So there's examples of that happening.
Um, and what was the second
Question? Yeah, but I suppose what I'm
interested in is why, so, so
that's already happening in some places.
Yeah. But you are saying, well, let's make it broader and,
and so that every place across the country is thinking
about this in terms of risk to life.
Yep. Yep. Okay. Yep. Um, no thank you.
Uh, look, LAN has a question.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I just wondered about the Natural Hazards Commission.
If you had a view as to about the importance of
environmental integrity when it comes to hazard resilience.
And I'm just raising that
because we have heard, um, particularly from councils,
but many submitters about their concern
for just environmental outcomes generally
and how that lends itself to resilience.
Do you have any, um, views about where the balance
or non balance of the environmental provisions
are in these bills?
Um, I think as far as natural hazard management goes, um,
there's nature-based solutions are always an option
to be looked at, um, as part of the sort of suite of tools
that are available to manage, um,
different natural hazards as well.
So that could be coastal hazards, flooding, um,
land instability, for instance,
nature-based solutions can all have a role in that.
Um, so I think there is a place for those in, in the bills
as they're, um, worded.
Okay. Thank you.
And Grant has another question. Yeah, just
It's probably, um, how do you assess when you're looking
at in terms of planning
and the risk, um, that those ex extreme events, like
for example, we've had, we have them
with the high rainfall events where you get
that really big dump.
Like we had oh, example up in Northland, you follow
Iraq area, uh, two 90 mils in five hours.
Right. That could happen randomly just about anywhere.
And I mean, so to assess the impact of that,
and it is how realistic is
to actually do that when you're planning.
'cause that's really hard to do. I thought
If you want.
So, um, look, I can't, I can't answer to the technical side
of it, but some of these risk models are incredibly,
incredibly, uh, clever with what they can do
with called probabilistic modeling.
That is they assess how many times it's gonna happen over a
period of, say, 50 years.
And then it becomes an annualized, uh, pattern
of, uh, occurrence.
Um, and for some hazards, that's what we rely on.
So it really is just the best assessment based on,
on modeling and yeah.
Okay. It's not an exec science clinic.
Absolutely. Yeah. But thank you very much
for your submission today.
We appreciate your time
and, uh, yeah, good insight into natural hazards
and what we need to be aware of, um, with this legislation.
So thank you. Thank you, thank
You.
So we now move to our next submitter, uh, irrigation.
Welcome to the committee this afternoon.
You have 20 minutes with us.
Take your submission as read
and we'll hand it over to you to talk us through it,
the main points, and then we'll open up
the questions. So thank you.
Great. Thank you Madam Chair and members of the committee.
Uh, Kira and good afternoon.
I'm Karen Williams, chief Executive
of Irrigation New Zealand.
Alongside my husband, I farm an irrigated, arable and sheep
and beef property in the Adapa.
I'm a trustee on the new trustee on the New Zealand
Farm Environment Trust.
I've also worked as a resource management planner,
involved in both local and regional planning processes.
These experiences give me a practical perspective on
how water infrastructure, land use decisions
and environmental management interact on the ground.
With me as my colleague Steven McNally Irrigation,
new Zealand's principal technical advisor,
and the lead author of our submission,
Steven has four decades
of experience in agricultural production,
irrigation system design,
and water infrastructure development.
Irrigation New Zealand represents nearly 5,000 members
across New Zealand, including farmers, growers,
irrigation schemes, designers,
and water management professionals.
Our members work with freshwater every day,
and their businesses depend on managing it carefully
and responsibly.
Many of our members have also made their own submissions,
um, highlighting specific issues arising from the reforms,
and we can bend those perspectives to the committee
as an important reflection
of practical experience from across the sector.
You have already received our written
submission, as you acknowledged.
Our submission supports the intent of the reform
as set out by the government.
This includes supporting a limits based plan led system.
We do, however, highlight key issues
where the current drafting does not
yet fully give effect to the intent.
In light of the time available,
we will focus on presenting three key positions that un
that underpin the recommendations and our submission.
These positions relate to
how the new resource management system frames irrigation
water storage, and the productive use of natural resources.
Because legislation does more than regulate activities,
it sets the tone for how those activities are interpreted
by decision makers and that tone matters.
Food production is one
of the ways New Zealand converts natural
resources into public benefit.
It feeds our population
and it supports the export economy
that underpins living standards across the country.
The first position we wish to highlight,
therefore relates to the goals of the new system.
The bills speak clearly about environmental protection,
and they should, but they're largely silent about the role.
Natural resources play in producing food
and supporting communities.
If that silence remains,
decision makers may interpret farming primarily
as a pressure to constrain rather than a, a societal outcome
to manage responsibly within environmental limits.
Environmental protection
and food production are not competing objectives.
They are outcomes that must be managed together.
The solution we see is
to explicitly recognize food production in the system goals.
This will help restore balance.
Our second position relates to infrastructure recognition.
Water storage and distribution systems share many
of the characteristics of other long lived infrastructure,
such as hydro energy storage, trans built networks
and communications.
They require significant capital investment,
operate over many decades,
and support regional economies and communities.
Encouragingly irrigation has recently been recognized in the
national infrastructure plan produced
by the New Zealand Infrastructure Commission.
However, irrigation infrastructure is not consistently
recognized alongside other long lived
infrastructure classes.
In the current resource management reform,
definitions matter
because how infrastructure is defined
strongly influences whether it is enabled, delayed,
or indeed prevented.
Altogether our submission asks, asks
for consistent recognition, water storage
and distribution infrastructure should be recognized
alongside other nationally significant
infrastructure classes.
Our third position relates to
how the resource management system interprets water
availability in New Zealand.
To expand on that context, I will hand over to Steven.
Thank you, Karen. Uh, it may be helpful
to briefly paint a picture of
how we see water systems functioning in New Zealand.
On average, the country receives up
to 300 billion cubic meters of rainfall each year.
Now, that is hard to fathom,
but to help picture this, it is the equivalent to five times
the volume of Lake Topo
or Wellington Sky Stadium filled the roof
265,000 times every year,
Use of it Across all human uses.
Combined, including agriculture, industry,
and municipal supply.
About 8% of available fresh water is utilized.
Irrigation represents the largest share
of those consented takes.
Importantly, around 92% of fresh water continues
to move naturally through rivers
and aquifers to the sea
sustaining ecosystems throughout the catchment.
So the challenge we face in New Zealand is not
absolute water scarcity.
It is variability. Rainfall arrives unevenly across the
country and unevenly through the year.
Much of it falls in the winter
and on the western side of the country,
while plant demand peaks
and summer, particularly in eastern regions,
with climate change, expected
to bring more intense rainfall effects
and longer dry periods.
Managing this variability will become
increasingly important.
Storage allows water to be captured when it is abundant
and used when it is scarce.
Distribution systems then move that water to areas
where demand actually occurs.
This point matters
for the resource management reform process.
Because of policy assumed scarcity as the starting point,
the system will primarily focus on constraining use.
But if instead, the system recognizes variability,
that allows solutions
to be managed more strategically over time
and within limits storage is often vis, uh,
only visualized as large dams.
In practice, storage occurs at many scales across catchments
may involve on-farm ponds.
Capturing winter flows may include constructed wetlands
or aquifer recharge that enhance groundwater reserves
and natural flow parts.
Or it may be community irrigation schemes,
distributing stored water across many farms
and orchards at larger scales
that may involve regionally significant infrastructure.
Improving water security across entire catchments
and can include hydro energy production.
The common principle remains the same.
Capturing flows when water is plentiful reduces pressure on
water resources during high demand periods.
This is why infrastructure recognition within the resource
management reform framework is important.
It's also worth clarifying
what irrigation in New Zealand is actually used for
'cause irrigation is often associated publicly
with a single land use, but the reality is far more diverse.
Our 900,000 hectares of irrigation supports a wide range
of production systems for our domestic
and international markets.
Approximately 90% of horticulture production is irrigated.
80% of arable grains and seed operations use irrigation.
54% of vineyards rely on irrigation.
40% of sheep
and beef farms use irrigation on some part of their land.
And 28% of the hectares and dairy is irrigated.
Together these sectors support employment, export earnings,
and local food supply.
Water storage infrastructure also serves multiple community
purposes rather than being a single use asset.
Stored water contributes to rural town, water supplies,
firefighting capacity, industrial processes, recreation
and environmental enhancement across your constituencies
and portfolios.
Irrigation underpins much of New Zealand's economy
and our communities,
and that's not just an abstract policy issue.
I'll now hand back to Karen to
Thank you, Steven.
The context Steven has outlined explains why the framing
of this legislation, legislation matters.
If irrigation farming are framed primarily
as environmental pressures,
the system will regulate them mainly
as activities to constrain.
But we manage well irrigated land strengthens food
production, regional employment,
and provides greater resilience to climate variability.
So the decisions before this committee are very much about
balance, balance between protecting fresh water
and enabling responsible use for that balance.
To be clear, in the new system,
we suggest the legislation should reflect
three key elements.
First system goals that eng recognize the importance
of food production alongside environmental protection.
Second, consistent recognition of water storage
and distribution infrastructure
as long lived infrastructure.
And third water management tools
that reflect New Zealand's reality of variability.
Rather than assuming water scarcity is everywhere,
irrigation new supports,
responsible water use within scientifically supported
environmental limits.
The system must recognize the infrastructure
and land uses that allow water to be managed productively
and responsibly.
This reform is a once in a generation opportunity
to get the balance right.
Thank you for the opportunity to present today,
and we welcome your questions.
Thank you very much for that submission
and insight. Look, we'll go to
Steve Abel First.
Thank you. Um, chair. Thank you for the submission.
Um, so since the advent of large scale irrigation,
our groundwater nitrate levels have significantly worsened.
Um, so your industry is at the heart of some
of our most chronic water contamination problems,
particularly in Canterbury.
'cause big irrigation is driven.
Dairy intensity isn't your
industry exactly the reason why we need to constrain
activities that are gonna chronically harm?
What is the collective commons? Our fresh water,
I think irrigation has enabled all sorts of, um,
agricultural land uses to evolve,
including arable.
Um, we wouldn't be offered a a a contract
to grow a certain number of our crops without
that reliability of water.
Um, it's enabled, um, a flourishing, horticultural,
um, industry with, with kiwi fruit
and apples certainly shining lights.
And yes, it has enabled dairying and the, um, application
and nutrients associated with any of those, um,
activities need to be carefully managed.
Can I ask yourself on that? Yes.
Why is it that you don't mention nutrients or nitrate
or the consequences of
that irrigation intensity in your entire 65 page submission?
You don't seem to acknowledge your very significant part
as an industry in that worsening,
worsening nutrient pollution policy.
We, we start our submission saying we support a limits
lead plan-based planning system.
So that covers all sorts of activities.
There's all sorts of contributions, many factors to
human impact on the land, including food production
and, uh, the shift in land use over the decades since the
government established the first irrigation in the 1920s,
and we had 1.2 million people in New Zealand,
and now we've got something in the order of 5.3 globally,
we've now got 8 billion people.
Uh, we've got a, an obligation
to use our natural resources and soils to produce food.
That's one of our superpowers.
Our ability to use our natural resource.
There are environmental impacts
and we need a sensible planning system to
recognize environmental impact,
but actually meet the need of society, uh,
for safe nutritious food.
Mm-hmm.
Absolutely. Thank you for that. There's a supplementary
here from Grant McCullum stop
You. And ironically,
you opened your, one
of the key points you made is it's about getting the balance
right between eCommerce activity
and the use of, um, of, of water and, and, and,
and the environment, I should say.
Sorry. So the benefits, um, me
off the top of my head, the benefit
economic benefits to Canterbury.
'cause that's obviously where, uh, members focusing is mind
is of, of, of the, of irrigation would be substantial.
And I wouldn't, without irrigation in Canterbury,
I I would imagine it would be all,
it would just be dry land farming and very low returns
and low economic activity.
Would, would any comment on that? Yeah,
We've certainly seen images of, of, uh,
Canterbury pre irrigation, which, um, certainly some
of the images I've seen, um, look like a dust bowl.
Um, yep. So this, this has bought enabled options.
Um, it has bought, and,
and Steven will have the, the absolute figures.
But, um, there some real thriving economy to Canterbury.
It is, um, very much a, a powerhouse of, of food production.
Mm-hmm. And, and the associated, um,
wellbeing of those communities.
Yes, there is a nitrate problem as, as Steve's mentioned.
Um, and there absolutely needs to be a commitment to,
uh, and improving that.
And, and, and that is, has what has been undertaken.
Um, we know it's a long standing legacy issue
and it's, um, through various land uses,
and there is commitment to improve that,
but it will take time.
Um, you know, it, it was created over many decades
and it will take some time to pull it back.
Yeah. And, and look, um, uh,
the irrigation schemes are closely audited in Canterbury,
uh, under farm environment plans by the regional council.
And the regional council's recently reported, uh,
improvement in groundwater nitrate sampling.
And they've reported a high level
of confidence in the audit, uh, scores for, um,
the processes that irrigators are taking.
In other words, adopting best practice, uh, responsible use
of water, make sure that the water produces, uh,
food not runoff.
And that's shifted, uh, dramatically so
that those farms are now getting a and b audit scores.
Correct. The, the evidence is actually
that things are improving, not stagnated back. And, and,
And, and one final sum in terms of the impact is, um,
where you have, uh, water storage
and you get control minimum
flows, particularly through sump.
The impact on the, on the, the biodiversity
and the fish life and that sort of thing in those river,
in those streams of rivers would be, uh, is, is proven
to be, um, positive from my experience. Is that correct?
Yes, absolutely. It, it, it gives you those options.
I can speak, um, to our farm
and what we've done with biodiversity planting, rip
planting, um, queen Elizabeth, um, national trust,
covenanting of special biodiversity areas
that are irrigation whilst, um,
whilst irrigating our crops also keeps the, um,
those plants alive too.
There's nothing more heartbreaking than
and planting 20,000 plants.
Yeah. Summer drought and you get a summer drought.
Yeah, of course. And they all die,
or certainly a good percentage of them do. Thank you.
Thank you. And you horticulture New Zealand
and some of the other submitters have obviously raised the
issue on food production as well.
Um, so thank you for those points.
Look, I just wanted to ask you, um, around the, the W Cs
and the reference that you've made to the WS in terms
of the current WS water conservation orders
and the, um, ones that are potential future
Ws and your, can you just explain
and elaborate a little further on
what you're wanting to see there?
Do you wanna go, Peter? Uh, yes.
I guess, um, I'll go with succinctly
and then if I, um, um, don't answer,
well Steven will clarify,
but, uh, i, I guess what we're seeing is, is
with water conservation orders, it's a,
it's a different process to, um,
a resource management framework that has a similar type
of approach to that.
Um, what we don't wanna see, I guess is a, as a duplication
of that, but, um, certainly some of our,
our schemes have been through some lengthy processes
to secure, um, access to water
and responsible use of that water
through their water conservation, um, orders.
Yeah. So when you say duplication though,
are you saying that it's dealt with in other legislation
and doesn't need to be directly dealt
with in this legislation?
I, I, I think what we're trying to achieve through the,
the drafting and the intent,
and maybe the redrafting is a system
that people can work with.
So limits lead plan con, uh, planned, uh, future, um,
participation, uh, where you can contribute the,
the water conservation water provides,
quite frankly a back door that is a parallel process
that circumvents all that good work that we're trying
to establish on the basis of, uh,
any individual can instigate a water
conservation water process.
So it's a second bite of the cherry, in my opinion.
And they were really established even
before the RMA even existed
before there were any protections at all.
And it's carried through.
Having said that, some of our schemes have,
have got hard one, uh, water conservation water conditions
that tell 'em what their flow allocation process is.
To remove those at the moment into a completely uncertain
new system would be, would be, uh, detrimental.
So our position is no new water conservation orders
because it doesn't fit a modern planning system transition.
The current water conservation waters once a suitable new
planning framework has been enabled.
Uh, and then transition the water conservation water
provisions out of our legislation.
Okay. We don't need a duplicate system if
we get the first one right. Hmm.
Okay. No, no, no. Really valid points.
Um, thank you for clarifying that. Um, that makes sense.
Uh, land Farm has a question.
Um, first just a supplementary on the water
conservation orders.
Do you think in a modern, uh, resource management system
as you describe it, there is actually scope
and some might say a need for
specific water conservation orders that actually do
protect from excessive use and development?
Like, can you accept that potentially that would be part
of a modern system?
Uh, thank you for the question.
Um, I think if we get our primary legislation right
as in limits lead, uh, limits constraint plan lead,
that should protect our water bodies.
Okay. Thank you. Thank You.
Um, just another quick question, Lauren,
'cause we're we're nearly at time.
Um, I just wanted to pick up on your concerns.
Um, you were talking about sort of
backdoor like water conservation orders being a backdoor,
um, but you've had, um, changes that you've been part
of advocating for, such as the removal of section 70
and 1 0 7, and also the extension of
consent duration, which came through in this, um, bill
that went through under urgency.
And now do you wanna just enlighten the, uh, committee
with the issues that you are having now
that those won't be in the new system
and the, the joint expiry of all those consents?
I think there's two questions in there. Yeah. Yes.
Um, I think section 70
and 1 0 7 from, uh, my perspective
with irrigation schemes is around setting, uh, targets, uh,
particularly for diffuse discharges.
That is con uh, a scheme needed
to meet under a consent condition
and allow a sinking lid approach so that those, uh,
limits could be met over a reasonable timeframe.
And I think that provision needs to be carried forward, uh,
into this new legislation.
I think the consent duration is a different question.
Um, and particularly around, uh, uh, infrastructure
and the investment and infrastructure is recognition of
where, uh, for example,
an irrigation scheme has been operating within
its consent conditions.
Uh, rather than being assessed against a clean sheet
environmental, uh, assessment
and starting the process from scratch.
Look, thank you very much.
We are going to have to leave it there.
Some, some great insights.
Thanks for your submission, um,
and coming in person to the committee today.
So thank you. Thank you Catherine.
Um, look for those following along.
I am just going to highlight
that there was a timing, uh, mistake.
So, uh, we have got an extra submission in here
that hasn't been accounted for.
So we are running a bit behind, uh, time,
but I will call New Zealand Fish
and Game Council up for their submission, uh, which
of course was meant to start 20 minutes ago,
but, uh, on the agenda, but is currently starting now.
So we are running a little bit behind the agenda
time well imagined.
So, uh, welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us, so, uh, in the essence
of time we will hand it over to you to talk us
through your submission.
Right. Kira Cotu, I'm Barry Barnes, I'm the chair
of Fish and Game New Zealand.
And thank you very much for the opportunity to submit today.
Sitting next to me on my left is Corina John, who's the CEO
of Fish and Game New Zealand.
And next to Corina is Helen Ma, who is the director
and principal planner for Kahu Environmental.
I think on, uh, on, in behind me,
I have Richie Cosgrove, who's the Chief Operating Officer
for Fish and Game New Zealand,
hopefully online we've got Helen Brossman,
who is the Senior policy advisor, um, Marie Baker,
Galloway partner Anderson Lloyd
and Nick Singers, who's an independent environmentalist,
if I may, fish
and game are the statutory managers for sports, fish
and game birds, representing about 300,000 license holders.
And they fund our work entirely through their license fee,
which they obviously pay each year.
When we speak today, we speak on their behalf,
but also on behalf of hundreds of thousands
of New Zealanders who enjoy
and love our rivers, lakes, and wetlands.
Now Fish
and Game has a clear statutory role to manage sports, fish
and game birds and to advocate
for their habitats that support them.
Since the Resource Management Act was a, uh, enacted,
we have been able to fulfill that role through planning
and consenting systems, working alongside councils, iwi,
landholders, landowner, sorry, communities
to protect the freshwater habitat and public access.
We support replacing the RMA.
We want this reform to succeed.
However, we are concerned that
as drafted these bills put the future of hunting
and fishing at risk,
and we're asking the committee to
make some changes. Thank you.
Thank Kiara. Um, so New Zealand needs these reforms.
We're fully supportive of changes in our way.
We manage our natural resources across New Zealand
to reduce bureaucracy, reduce costs,
and deliver better outcomes for our communities.
That's environmental outcomes, economic outcomes
and wellbeing outcomes.
However, we've got some concerns that parts of the bill need
to be, uh, relooked at,
and we've identified those through our submission
and we've tried to make them targeted.
We believe changes in this space will better enable more
efficient delivery of those outcomes,
those economic outcomes, environmental outcomes,
and community wellbeing outcomes.
One of our main concerns is
that the build doesn't recognize hunting, fishing,
or the habitats of sports fish and game birds.
And while that might seem peripheral, it's not really, um,
hunting and fishing is really important for
around about 300,000, uh, new Zealanders,
those are our license holders.
And a number of more, just think southland, um,
opening weekend for game birds
where it's like a national event.
Also, the role of fish
and game is to, um, essentially work to support, uh,
good freshwater outcomes.
They not only provide for angling values
and for the habitat of sports fish, um,
but they also provide protections
and outcomes for our wider communities, including advocating
for access and good water quality outcomes
that protect indigenous species as well.
So these are not peripheral concerns.
They go to the heart of whether wild freshwater fisheries
and game bird habitats are valued.
And also fish and games role, um, as a statutory manager
of sports, fishing game birds and New Zealand,
and its contribution to ensuring access
and healthy habitats for all.
I'm just briefly gonna, um, summarize some of our key, um,
key manners that we've identified in our submission,
but I'll do it quickly to leave
plenty of time for questions.
So we are asking for trout
and salmon habitat to be recognized, uh, within the builds,
obviously under Section seven H at the moment.
The habitat, uh, protection for the habitat of trout
and salmon is explicitly risk recognized.
That wasn't just because of the recognized importance
of their species, but it was
because when the resource management came into effect,
there was a clear recognition
that we knew a lot about salmons their habitat requirements.
And that to recognize them would enable us
to see set clear environmental outcomes
that will protect other species as well.
Um, so at the moment that recognition is absent from the new
bills, the new bills don't recognize,
essentially they recognize use,
they recognize indigenous protections,
but there's nothing really
and they recognize, um, economic development,
but there's nothing really in them
that recognizes the enjoyment
that humans get from a healthy natural environment.
So it's quite a material and mission from the bills.
And so a number of the changes that we're seeking seek
to rebalance that
or include that within the goals within the lay
la, uh, limits framework.
And with, within the provisions of the builds public access
to rivers and lakes, um, and wetlands must be enhanced.
So there's provisions in there that recognize it
and maintain it, but at the same time,
we're losing some of those protections.
So there's nothing about enhancing public access
to our, our waterways.
What we know is this is a main
or priority issue for our license holders,
for our anglers and our hunters.
But it's also really important
for just wider New Zealanders.
Part of our wellbeing is the ability to go down
and access a healthy environment
and just take time to enjoy it.
And we've done wellbeing research that identifies, um,
the deep, uh, uh, intrinsic values
that people get from being able to connect
with their natural environment.
Um, and as part of that,
obviously we've got the Esplanade reserves,
and within that there's no material or
or ability for us to essentially enhance access When we're
thinking about Esplanade reserves.
Obviously Esplanade reserves are put in place when
landowners decide to subdivide.
So they're getting a private property benefit
or economic outcome from that activity without
that contribution back to a public good.
The other part is wetlands must be clearly defined,
protected, and restored.
We support changes in the way wetlands are considered
and managed in New Zealand.
'cause our current system makes it really, really difficult
to put wetlands back in place.
We've only got about 90% of our wetlands left.
Yes, funny that term's been around
for the last 20 years that I know of.
So we probably need to look at that.
Um, but we also know
that wetlands are really important across our communities.
They gr they, um, are a key tool within our climate change
mitigation toolbox.
They're a key tool in the tools that farmers use in relation
to managing their land and be able to mitigate
and avoid some of the losses from those farming systems.
They provide essential habitat to sports, uh,
gain birds in particular, but indigenous species as well.
Um, and so we're looking for better recognition of them,
but at the same time allowing us
or enabling us to actually restore and create wetlands.
So our current systems are overly bureaucratic.
The consents are, are too onerous
and the costs are too high
to really support communities put wetlands back in place.
Fish and game management plans are not recognized at all.
So under current statute legislation resource management,
it says you, um, need to recognize, um, plans made
by other statutory entities.
Fish and Game has 10 year sports fish
and game bird management plans.
And we're seeking changes to that.
Ensure that when our national instruments are going through,
when we're thinking about regional planning processes,
that we're also considering sports fishing,
game bird management plans.
And I can talk about the value of that.
Um, shortly if you wanna ask me a question on that.
Water conservation orders we just
had that, uh, spoken about.
I'm happy to take any con any questions you want on water
conservation orders, fish
and game put 12 of the 16 water conservation orders.
Heads up Marie Baker Galloway, I'm gonna throw
to you for a tricky questions.
You can answer them with a le lawyer lawyer's legal lens.
Um, but these are really important.
Water conservation orders are the same
as our national parks in New Zealand.
Wco OS are the only tool
that we have currently within our toolbox
to recognize these outstanding environments.
They don't occur everywhere. They're not common.
Um, this is about recognizing our most outstanding
freshwater habitats for the values that that we have.
We thank this government
or this, um, for actually recognizing water conservation
orders and we're asking for some tweaks just to make sure
that they land well in regional plans and consents
and permanent conditions.
Um, just about finished wildlife approvals.
So they must remain within fish and game.
So currently there's clause 1, 2 8, um,
in the proposed bill, which would allow regional councils
through national resource permitting processes
to grant wildlife approvals for game birds.
That means essentially regional councils can issue permits
to disturb or kill game birds without recourse
or consultation with fish and game.
I think Canada Geese is a great example, uh, of
what happens when you essentially take management
of a species of an entity that's custom made
or purpose built to manage these species.
It doesn't go so well. So to undermine fish
and game statutory ability
and expertise by enabling regional councils
to make these decisions, I think would not land well.
So our closing message is this,
healthy rivers thriving wetlands
and secure public access access aren't just good
for anglers and hunters.
They're good for all New Zealanders now
and for future generations.
And we look forward to working with the committee
to get this right and we're happy to take questions.
Thank you Carina. Uh, really insightful submission.
Look, we have got a flurry of questions.
Uh, so we will start with, uh, Priyanka first.
Um, thank you for your submission.
Um, today, uh, just had a question around the point
that you've made, um, about the need for wetlands to be, uh,
defined in the legislation and protected.
Um, and I just had a question, I guess in relation
to the Natural and Built Environments Act, which, uh,
aligned the definition with, I think it was the NPS
for Fresh Water management, um,
and the natural environment standards for fresh water.
Um, and also in that legislation, wetlands were one
of the ecosystem types
for which mandatory environment limits, um, had to be set.
I'm wanting to know, these don't exist in the current
iteration of, uh, the natural environment.
Bill, are you asking for something similar
to be introduced into this
or are you wanting it to go even further?
Uh, no, we are quite supportive of that approach.
So I mean the, what we're seeing through this bills is
that there's an absence of the recognition
of wetlands despite their importance to New Zealanders
and their key part that they play across our communities.
So strengthening,
I think we've got some recommendations in relation
to the wetland definition, which you've outlined.
And then we wanna see them embedded, um, across the,
the planning instruments in particular,
they should be considered when you're thinking about limits,
but they also should be considered when you're thinking
about, uh, mitigation, um,
and they should be considered when you're thinking about,
uh, goals, um, uh, that are embedded within the, um,
natural environment bill as well.
Did you have anything to add, Helen? No. Okay. Thank
You. Thank you.
Thank you. We'll now move to Cameron Luxton.
Oh, thank you chair. Um, uh, yeah, it's clear that, um,
that, uh, trout
and salmon are an interesting, um, case
that can talk about the wider environment
and protecting the environment helps the fish.
So it's mutually exclusive, but, um, mutually beneficial.
But my question, like there is no section, uh,
was it seven H equivalent?
So the recognition of introduced, um, uh, trout
and salmon in the RMA,
there's no equivalent in the new legislation,
but do you think that, uh, that could still be found out,
uh, through a na uh, through a, um,
national policy direction?
And do you think that maybe I'm, I'm speculating,
but do you think it's because there's been so many cases
where that has gone to the environment court
where section seven A has been used
and um, to, you know, things to do with, you mentioned this,
uh, south and before, I'm just,
do you think there's a purposeful reason
that it's not been included?
I'm hoping it's just an omission.
Um, I'll I'll leave the rest of that answer,
uh, uh, up to you.
Um, so I think what we need to see is, um, I'll,
I'll answer in relation to what the solution is.
Um, we'd like to see the goals reflect essentially, uh,
hunting and angling values.
We'd like to see limits reflect, uh, sports fish
and game birds and introduce, uh, sports fish
and introduce game birds.
They obviously do still, um,
consider our indigenous game birds.
Obviously we, we are managing both.
But the, in relation to that, the reason why I say
that is the definition of life supporting capacity
and the definition of ecosystem health.
And that link through to limits explicitly exclude,
valued, introduced species.
So they're indigenous focused.
Um, so what we've got here is a, a failure
to recognize our values through the goals
and then a failure to recognize these species
through the limits framework
and then the various provisions.
Um, so, uh, to answer you, I'm hoping that
that's just an oversight and then we can rapidly fix that.
Um, but it is, it's really important, uh,
for our communities and obviously, um,
angling in New Zealand is worth about 139 million, um,
and probably more so it's significant
to the economic wellbeing of the country as well.
Thank you. Look, we'll move Tolan Farm now.
Koto, thank you so much for your submission
and thank you for all the work
that's gone into the establishment
of those water conservation orders, which is exactly
what I would like to hear more about
because given some positions of previous submitters
and others, um, you know, it's clear that people would like
to see water conservation orders scrapped.
You are saying that they could actually be strengthened
in a modern system.
What could that actually look like?
This one I'm gonna throw to, uh, Marie Baker Galloway,
so she can give you a detailed answer.
Cool, thanks Karina.
The changes that we've proposed, um, affect
how regional councils would, um, instead
of just the natural environment plan being not inconsistent
with a water conservation order,
which is the current framework in the RMA
and brought through into the bills, um, change
that phrasing to implement.
So it's more direct.
We've also added into the various enforcement provisions,
um, an explicit acknowledgement
that we're an activity is in breach
of a restriction in prohibition in a water conservation
order that constitutes an offense, um, at the moment
that RMA
and the bills, um, are both silent on that leaving, um,
either uncertainty
or an a, an argument that you cannot prosecute someone
for breaching a water conservation order.
And we've also added into the sections, uh,
for resource consent decisions
and explicit requirement that, um,
or explicit signpost if you like,
to water conservation orders, which, um, amends a, a gap
or a silence that we've currently got in the RMA
and the bill as well, even though they are clearly relevant
to resource consent decisions,
that it's not explicit in the section.
So that that improves certainty in that regard as well.
Thank you. That's really clear.
Can I ask another question, chair? Yeah,
I might just jump in on a supplementary there
because it's the wording that you're wanting to change.
Is it that going from, uh,
a not compromised rather than man maintained?
Can you just explain that a little bit further?
Yeah, that's an additional change
to clause three I think in schedule four.
Yeah, yeah. Um, so the, the, the,
the wording in clause three, schedule four is new wording
and we just in looking at, um, the use of the word, um,
remain, the wording in the bill is remain without
change or variation.
And, um, we supported the use
of the phrases are not compromised rather than maintained.
Um, because that, um, allows for a better assessment
of the condition and protection
of the actual outstanding values rather than it being more
of a tick box exercise if you like.
Okay. Yeah. Thank you. Um, LAN another question.
Thank you. I just wanted
to pick up on your comments about, um, what's kind
of been referred to as the Wildlife Act override
and the fact that, you know, you're saying really clearly
that Fish and Game still needs a role in
that, in those approvals.
Can you just explain how that does work for the committee?
'cause we are, we are very aware of the dock part of that,
um, but not so much the fish and game aspects.
What's your role when those approvals come up?
Uh, so Fish and Game has, um, uh,
obviously statute functions under the conservation
of the Wildlife Act and one of those, um, is delegated
by the, by Department of Conservation DG is to issue, uh,
permits to disturb
or kill, uh, game birds if they're causing nuisance impacts
or for various activities.
So it's under, I think it's section 54, 55, 56
or something like that of the, of the Wildlife Act.
So what happens, um, this played out in Southland
last year, I'm able to talk about it.
Um, but, but essentially across,
across New Zealand we've got regional
fish and game councils.
And so if there's, if a farmer
or a landowner approaches that council says, Hey look,
I've got an issue with game birds on my property, then Fish
and Game will assess, um, the level of that impact
and they will recommend the best course of action
to enable those birds to, to be managed without
impacting on that crop.
So one of those tools we've got is to issue permits to kill,
um, game birds or disturb them.
So those permits essentially get,
get issued when we're doing that.
But um, when we're doing that, it's not just, um, go
and shoot game birds, we actually do it no, um,
with an understanding of the ecology
or the biology of these animals in the environment.
And what I mean by that is in such a way
that we're actually managing those game birds, so stopping
that nuisance impact, but also managing them
so we're not just moving those birds onto someone else's
property and moving the problem there,
or we're not just training the birds to, um,
remove themselves and changing training,
training, changing their behavior.
We've seen that with Canada guests right at the heart
of the hunt now than ever before.
'cause people are trying to manage them.
They don't understand the behavior of these animals.
So we take all of that into consideration when we're helping
landowners address their issues.
Thank you. Look, we'll take one last question
from Ryan Hamilton.
Oh thanks Chair. And forgive me.
Thanks Fish and Game for coming out in force.
And I know sometimes you've gotta go against the current
these, um, solutions,
but oh, a long day.
Um, you stay, the bill's focus on minimization,
you forfeit question.
Um, the focus on minimization removes
workable mitigation tools.
What kinds of mitigation approaches would be lost
or what consequences could be lost for fisheries
or access for hunting and fishing?
I'm gonna start answering that
and then I'll throw to Helen, this is just her heads up.
Um, yeah. So at the moment, the, the vision, the,
the provisions that used used to be avoid, mitigate, um,
avoid, remedy, mitigate, I think it was.
Um, and now we've got, um, minimize within
that minimizes a really restrictive toll.
It's very narrow in the things that you can consider.
So mitigate encompasses so much more than just minimize.
So a key mitigation tool, for example,
would be considering wetlands, um, which, um, I think is
that linkage there in between those, uh, wetlands
and also that that mitigation tool.
Um, and do you wanna pick up the rest of that?
Um, yeah, avoid, minimize
or remedy is language that comes from the, um,
effects management hierarchy when it comes
to offsetting and compensation.
So they have a very well understood meaning in that context.
Um, which is appropriate
because you're dealing with finite resources that need
to be replaced in the no net loss concept.
But in the broader resource management system,
we need more tools in the toolbox.
Um, and mitigation gives us some really valuable tools.
And a really great example of that is, uh,
riparian planting, which is a great way
to mitigate the effects of, um, discharges further upstream,
maybe nutrients for example, by shading that stream
or providing better habitat for the,
for the species within it that can mitigate the effect
of those, um, nutrients that
otherwise couldn't be avoided, for example.
And we don't wanna lose the, the ability
to have really practical mitigation tools
that we can employ on the ground. Yeah.
Thank you. Look, thank you very much
for your submission today, uh, for all
of those insights and considerations.
Really appreciate your time. So thank you. Thank you.
Interesting perspective. Thank you.
To get it from our first one on kind
of game birds and recreational sports.
So thank you.
Great. We now welcome our next submitter,
last submitter of the day.
Uh, the lucky, the lucky position
to be in manufacturer.
I was gonna say it could be the four o'clock Friday slide.
So the Employers and Manufacturers Association, welcome
to the select committee this afternoon.
Take it personally or going into evening, actually.
Um, yes, it's been a long day,
but you have 20 minutes with us.
Thank you. Do take your submission as read,
but we look forward to you talking us through it.
So, uh, over to you too
Long. Alan McDonald
from the EMA. I'm the head of advocacy.
Um, E em a is the largest business
organization in the country.
Uh, about 15%
of the country's employees work for our members.
Um, we are a national organization,
but the bulk of our membership is from Tahoe to north
of, there you go.
There you go. We're soon have a better road. Hopefully. Yes.
More of that. We live and hope in that one. Yeah, right.
Um, so submission's taken as read. That's fine.
I would mention that the EMA was also part
of a group called the Resource Reform Group,
which was ourselves, um, infrastructure in New Zealand,
property Council of New Zealand, and Gary Taylor at the EDS,
the Environmental, uh, defense Society.
We commissioned a piece of work with Gary, which kind
of started this process off about eight years ago, uh,
with Gary and his team,
when they could find the information, uh, sort of came
to the conclusion that we were kind of hoping
that they would, that the RMA was failing the current RMA
was failing the environment.
And so that was a catalyst to a number of changes
and we're hoping this one might stick
'cause we quite like most of it.
Um, I'll just maybe concentrate on a few things
that we just wanna see tidied up.
So the purposes and the goals, um, while each bill has a,
has a a goal, it doesn't have, sorry, a purpose.
It doesn't articulate
how the two are meant to work together.
And I think that's possibly something
that's a bit lacking given that they're going
to be the two most important, uh, pieces of legislation
to guide what's happening over the next
however many years this one lasts, um, for, uh, violent
and for our development and business communities.
So you would think there might be something
that stitches the two together.
Uh, we also find that some of the goals, uh, within the two
separate acts are kind of contradictory.
Now, the, the purpose of the spatial planning bill is one
of the purposes is to enable development.
Um, and then one of the goals in the environment bill is
to have net zero harm.
Um, you can't build something without kind
of knocking something over or building over the top of it.
So what is the net zero harm?
Does that mean if I kill a few bats in Southland
and there's another population somewhere that's thriving,
that's a net zero harm?
Or can I place replace one bit
of native it for us with another?
It's just, it's, it's a little contradictory.
So I think that needs a bit of tidying up
and some hierarchical priorities in
there would be useful too.
Um, there's a few vague terms in there.
Reasonable, you know, what's what,
there's one person's reasonable is another
one's horrific effect.
Um, I think we spent about 20 to 25 years trying
to define amenity value and I don't think we got there yet.
So, um, any of those sort of vague terms where possible,
and it's, it's difficult,
but I think we do need tighter definitions
around what's a reasonable effect,
what's a reasonable impact, what's a reasonable mitigation?
And I think some of the things
that are elsewhere in the bill, uh, will help that.
Uh, we are not supportive of ministerial decision making.
It's, um, it has a checkered history.
Uh, I can take you back to the marina for example,
which I think twice went to the high court
or the minister judicial review.
Both ministerial decisions both reversed. Mm-hmm.
Uh, and the other problem with that is given that, um,
the minister has a fairly loud voice in setting the,
the standards, the environmental standards, uh,
that leaves them open to be changed
or tinkered with, um, as governments change
and the, whether it's whatever flavor that minister has.
Um, so one of the big problems with the current RMA,
it's not the RMA itself, it's the way it's interpreted.
'cause it keeps changing, uh,
or having had 70 odd variations to it.
So if you leave that ministerial piece in place,
you leave it open to being changed.
And we've had enough of that.
We really need a bit more stability in some
of our policy settings, whether it's the environment,
education, health, whatever.
We need some more stability in some of that things.
So not hugely in favor of, um, ministerial
decision making powers.
The the other thing that we've seen happen is when you make
those decisions in a bubble, and I will only use this
because it's the most recent, uh, example, when David Parker
and the MFE came up with the water standards four
or five years ago now, um,
it basically stopped quarrying across the country
or development of expansion of the existing quarries
that was recognized almost from day one
of the announcement of the legislation.
But it took two years to fix it.
Uh, the quarrying industry lost one
or two seasons of taking off the overburden.
Quarry's quite important. Can't build a house without
aggregate and stuff like that.
So those sorts of things where you get
that decision making in a bubble, uh, is are not helpful.
And, and maybe the, you can look at some kind of independent
oversight or advisory
with genuine experts from all across the spectrum, uh, as to
how they might be developed and, and maintained.
And I think that's critical.
We, we expect some tinkering around the edges,
but let's not, um,
let's keep the guardrails on the main thrust of everything.
Uh, and as part of that too, we'd also like to see a review
of the fast track legislation.
If the new environmental
and, uh, spatial planning legislation are working the way
that everybody hopes they will, there shouldn't be a need
for a fast track legislation
unless there's some really outstanding circumstances.
But if the whole point of this is to give us a faster,
more efficient, less costly system, um, taking out many
of the impediments upfront,
then why do you need a fast track system?
Uh, the spatial planning, we're very much in favor
of it's well overdue.
Uh, and it, it does work.
I mean, we've seen a variation of it in Auckland
and it really does work.
I think the key to it is that most
of the heavy lifting needs to be done up front.
So in tandem with the environmental pla uh,
environmental build, if you know where you can build stuff
to, what envelope you can build into or develop stuff
or put things somewhere within those envelopes, then
that stops the kind of behavior You see
where a developer will go and go, I want eight stories
and 10 of 10 instead of 10.
It also gives the confidence to those
that are regulating the thing to say no
or give a firm decision.
Because too often you see the can kick down the road.
So the people in councils will go, well,
give us more information rather than just a
hard, no, you can't do that.
It's give us more information.
The process gets delayed, it gets longer.
Uh, people who have been consulted get a result
that they're not necessarily happy with
because the,
whoever's doing the thing has pushed hard enough
to get a project over the line
that isn't necessarily the best outcome for everybody.
So if there's a hard stop, there's a hard stop.
That's great. And that gives everybody certainty.
And so we, we really do think the spatial plan puts a lot
of those guardrails in place for that.
That also sets in place, you know, what's critical to iwi,
what's critical to the environment, uh, what's critical
for our rivers, our roadways, our networks, all of
that things puts in place
where our social infrastructure is going as well.
And that's also critical.
We're seeing that in parts of South Auckland now
with a new hospital plan for out Koru.
Um, part of that too, with that planning,
you need a business voice at the table.
So it was in previous legislation, uh,
with David Parker as an example.
So we've got West Auckland
and the North Shore with no available business
district to expand into.
I've got members on the North Shore who've taken their
manufacturing to Australia, uh, simply
because when they wanted to expand,
the only land available was South Auckland.
And their skilled work workforce said,
no, we're not moving south.
So they took it off offshore
and kept the workforce in place on North Shore.
So that's the sort of impact you get
and it's why we have highly congested
motorway in Auckland as well.
'cause all of West Auckland goes south to go to work
and off the North shore goes into the city.
So, you know, spatial planning will take care of all that.
In behind all of this,
we feel you need really strong monitoring and enforcement
and collection of best practice.
And that's absent from the system we have now,
or largely absent.
So I mentioned Gary before.
One of the biggest problems his team had when they were
trying to do this project for us to prove the impacts,
the negative impacts on the environment was actually finding
the data that didn't exist.
So, and, and that's got to be critical to
how we do things in the future.
And also how we perhaps fix some of the, the problems
of the past that Steve raised
before around nitrates and that kind of stuff.
Can't do anything without the data
and having it readily accessible.
And so we wanna see strong monitoring,
we wanna see strong enforcement
and we wanna see that information
gathering with best practice.
And that might be a beefed up EPA,
it might be some other thing,
but that's critical to the success of this
because we are letting some guardrails off of you.
Let's, let's not cut ourselves.
So if we're gonna do it and do it properly, we've got
to have that strong system in place.
Again, it gives you the certainty, the efficiency and,
and helps reduce the cost
and protects the environment, which
I don't think there's a businessman in New Zealand.
Well then we're a few, but there aren't many
that would say we don't wanna protect the environment.
It's, it's a critical difference for us in doing business.
So, you know, that's sort of, we've all got our tails
and horns and stuff and just want to go
and bulldoze everything.
That's not the case. And the best developments
that I've seen overseas really
highlight those sorts of things.
And they're starting to appear here too.
So that's really critical again, that, um,
monitoring affects the enforcement, uh,
regularly take regulatory takings.
They're a new thing. I don't think they're
well enough to find yet.
We need to do more on that.
I think one of the things that will do though is it'll make
those people, um, in decision making
positions be a bit more considerate
of the impacts of what they're doing.
You know, for example, people
who own in heritage properties, whether it's a a,
a private residence or a business, all of the cost
of maintenance and upkeep, it all falls on them to the point
where you see things where they just let them fall into
disrepair so they can bulldoze them 'cause they're unsafe.
That's an outcome nobody wants.
So I think that's something we just need to address
and you know, if it's drawing lines on a map and,
and Grant, I know particularly up north when the SNAs went
in place, there were some smaller holdings that,
that basically they became no longer viable.
Now that's fine if you don't want it to be viable,
but, um, at what cost to the owner of
that particular small farm to be finishing block
or whatever the case may be.
So we do need to get that right.
Um, it just needs a bit more detail on it,
but we are largely supportive of it.
And then just one other final point I would make with
that monitoring and,
and the, the monitoring particularly of the effects
and the outcomes of the development
or for longer run infrastructure, which may have a lifespan
of a hundred years, even a 25
to 30 year consent doesn't really work for those.
But if you've got detail
and accurate information about the effects of
that development, you don't need
to re-litigate the whole consent,
just ameliorate the effects and fix those.
Now, may not, may not always be possible,
but I don't think anyone's seriously suggesting
that mighty river power,
which I worked on their previous consenting
for the dams on the Wado River 25 years ago.
It took nine years to get them by the way.
Um, and they're starting again.
Um, but no one's seriously considering
we're gonna rip out the dams.
No, I don't think they are.
So if that's the case, what we should be looking at is
what are the effects and how do we, how do we manage those,
you know, the varying water levels, the off takes,
what's gonna happen with water care when it takes more water
out for Auckland's water, those sorts of things.
So that's me.
Brilliant. Well thank you very much for that submission.
Uh, we've got a question from Steve Abel.
Yeah, thank you. Um, you specific speak
specifically about respect for property.
Private property rights can only be a good thing
property owners, um, in regard to
the apparent imposition
of significant natural area designations.
But but isn't it true that, um,
if you have a significant natural area,
by definition it doesn't respect a property boundary.
It's, um, a commons that is of benefit
to all of us ultimately if it's biodiversity
or land or fresh water.
Are you guys asking questions or Yeah,
well we will be, you'll get to
Just Yeah, yeah, yeah. Just enable
Steve to have his
Question. And so
us understanding question though,
where those significant natural areas are sure.
Is surely useful for us and for private property owners.
I mean, I've got an SA on my property
and I know about it 'cause it's been no
Disagreed with you at all.
Um, and I would argue that that's probably a failure
of the previous regime, that things have been allowed
to either go ahead or
that land has already fallen into private ownership
or be kept gone into bright, not fallen,
gone into private ownership.
But then if it's for the common good
and you're taking somebody's private property, correct?
Uh, shouldn't the commons pay for that as well to, to comp,
whether it's regulatory or financial?
I'm not sure. It could be either or. Mm-hmm.
But if you are taking something
that's already in private ownership, uh, for a common good,
then if it's a common good,
surely the commons would be willing to pay for it.
A supplement relates s point supplement
Ground's gotta sub too. So
the commons been something that's essential
for our survival.
Private property has been a pretty relatively new
concept in human history
Only since about 1450 Something.
Yeah. Which is, you know, like, let's face it.
So, so just just be clear.
So sure that we've had a, we've got a problem
with massive degradation of the commons, right?
Climate change, water biodiversity.
If we don't protect that, there will be no proper property.
And that might sound sound a bit sort of restrained,
but that's kind of what we're grappling with, with a piece
of legislation here to protect that commons.
And if we have to pay for every bit of private property
that's impacted by that protection,
we won't be able to protect the comments.
What it does is it forces you to prioritize Correct.
You know, rather than just arbitrarily
drawing the line around something.
Which is kind of what happened with some
of the SNAs in Northland.
Correct. It forces you to look very carefully at the value
that you've just described for the commons.
Mm-hmm. As against what I want to do, uh, with my own land.
And that is the crux of it. As I say, it's a new thing.
Well it's not that new. It's used quite commonly overseas.
But anyway, it, it just gives you pause
for thought if you are going to do this,
what are the impacts on the owner?
How do we, if there's look a long established private use,
I mean we do it with the return of far land.
Uh, if there's a long established use, whatever,
how do we compensate for that?
And I think, you know, it's only fair that you've got
to look at it through at least partially through that lens,
if not wholly, but it's got
to be a significant factor in your decision making.
Look, we'll take another supplementary on
the regulatory review.
You just in that space 'cause um, it's been, um,
it seems to be a, an assumption that people don't,
that the landowners don't care about areas that significant.
Right. It's been your experience
that if you approach it the right way rather than the big
stick and when it's gonna take it,
that people will actually work with, you know,
they're prepared to work alongside, um, authorities to,
to enhance and protect those areas.
Absolutely. Um, so in a previous life I worked at Fonterra
where we bought in the,
the managed waterway system within Fonterra, I think 13
of the 15, um, farming regions or back with fair regional
and local councils.
So, um, yeah, there are one
or there are round backs out there always.
There always are. But the vast majority of people, um,
want to look after the land.
And I do think more of
that focus falls on the rural sector than it does
perhaps on the urban sector.
'cause I'm not swimming in Cox's Creek
or Oakley Creek or Anderson Creek.
No creek or Creek. 1% of our rivers in urban areas.
99% in Yeah. But we are still pouring sewage into the ocean.
Sure. Gotta deal with it all.
That's before it happened down. Yeah.
Look, thank you. We'll go to Ryan Hamilton for a question.
Thanks Chair. Um, thanks for your submission.
I think you've presented a fairly balanced view across some
of the challenges we've got to deal with.
Um, can you talk a bit about the contradiction
between economic growth and say no net loss?
Um, have you got a view on how we might better clarify
or define a hierarchy?
Um, it's easy in urban areas
because we've got real pressure or easier in urban areas
'cause we've got real pressure on critical things like
housing and roading and hospital and school infrastructure.
So in some, in some respects, that becomes easier
and they're already brownfield most of them.
So you're not pushing out into the greenfields.
I I do think, you know, if you are going
to prioritize infrastructure development on a,
on large scale and, and that could be wind farms,
solar farms, whatever else you're gonna do,
there is a destructive element
to building one of those things.
But if the greater need is more electricity, uh, then,
you know, some paddocks in the far north
or whatever the case may be with a, maybe a waterway running
through them, as long as the effect on the,
or the impact on the waterway is, is ameliorated
and mitigated, then the priority should be the development
that's in arguably in a greater national good.
Um, and same with, you know, um,
large scale housing developments.
You know, simply having a plan that says the, the amount
of work that goes into those things to manage runoff
and things like that is far advanced from
where it was 20, 25 years ago.
Now I've been to a former airport in Denver
where people from around the rest of the city come to
that development because of its walkways, it's cycleways,
it's wetlands, it's parklands, it's outdoor arena, all
that kind of stuff that's good in development.
You might not like the shape and size of the buildings,
but actually the living environment's really good
and we're doing more and more of that here.
Not enough, but more so I think there is a balance
to be struck and that's why we like the best practice thing
as well in establishing that. Thanks.
Look, thank you. Look, got time
for one last question from LA Farm.
You know, quite Alan, thanks so much for your submission.
I wanted to ask about your comments on transitioning away
from fast track, but I wondered if you had concerns about,
um, we've currently got the situation now where
fast track decisions can come in over the top of
planned out planning decisions and also existing uses
and the essentially the private rights of consent holders.
Are you concerned in the interim, um, about those rights
of existing holders
and it's particularly, uh, prevalent in the water space
when, when we're talking about big fast track developments
that get access to water takes
that then constrain everyone else who has existing use?
Yeah, I mean having had a look at, um, the fast track,
those that are in the fast track, yes there are,
there are some that look like what you were saying
that they ride rough shot over,
but the, the fast track is there at the moment to catch up
on basically a lot of critical things that we haven't done.
And that's why we say review the current fast track in
2, 3, 5 years, whatever the number might be
to see if it's still fit for purpose.
Do we need to do for that? Uh, do we need to do that?
Um, and I think you've already seen one
or if not two of the panels push back
and say no, we're not going to do that as well.
So there's a bit of a, there's a bit
of a good pro quo going on there
I guess for those in that process.
But thank you very much for your time today
and your submission and
for being the last submission of today.
The lucky last Yes. No,
Four more days. Oh, lucky you.
We appreciate your insights. So thank you.
Thank you very much. Great, great.
Look, that brings us to the end
of our public session today.
So, uh, members, we've uh, now enter private session,
uh, with our officials.